Page 1: [No Text Extracted]

Page 2:
About the Translator 
MICHAEL E. MARMURA was born in Jerusalem on 
November 11,1929. He received his B.A. in 1953 from 
the University of Wisconsin and went on to obtain 
both an M.A. and a Ph.D. from the University of 
Michigan. He is professor emeritus at the University 
of Toronto, where he taught from 1959 until 1995 and 
where he twice chaired the Department of Middle 
East and Islamic Studies. 
Dr. Marmura has published medieval Arabic phi­
losophical texts and translations, as well as numerous 
articles on Islamic philosophy, many of them devoted 
to the thought of Avicenna and al-Ghazali. His publi­
cations include an edition of Ibn Sina's Fi ithbat al-
nubuwwdl (Proof of prophecy); Refutation by Alexander 
of Aphrodisias of Galen's Treatise on the Theory of Motion, 
with N. Reseller; and Islamic Theology and Philosophy: 
Studies in Honor of George F. Houratii, of which he was 
the editor. He has also published a history of Islamic 
philosophy incorporated in Der Islam II: Politische 
Entwicklungen und theologische Konzepte, coauthored 
with W. Montgomery Watt. 
• 
ON THE COVER: ' Iyddibn Musd, 
Al-Shafaf II huquq al-Mustafa,seventeenth-century 
work (detail). Courtesy oj Special Collections, 
Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University. 
Photographed by David Ilawkinson 
Jacket design by Jonathan Saltznian 
BRIGHAM YOUNG UNIVERSITY PMSI 
PROVO, UTAH 

Page 3:
THE INCOHERENCE 
OF THE PHILOSOPHERS 

Page 4:
EDITOR-IN-CHIEF 
Parviz Morewedge 
Binghamton University 
EXECUTIVE EDITOR 
Daniel C. Peterson 
Brigham Young University 
ASSOCIATE EDITORS 
Glen M. Cooper, D. Morgan Davis 
Muhammad Eissa, Elizabeth W. Watkins 
ADVISORY BOARD 
Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas Michael E. Marmura 
Jalal Badakhchani Seyyed Hossein Nasr 
Charles E. Butterworth Ismail K. Poonawala 
William C. Chittick Nasrollah Pourjavady 
Farhad Daftary Anthony Preus 
Majid F. Fakhry John Walbridge 
Hermann Landolt Hossein Ziai 
EDITORIAL ASSISTANTS 
Kyle Hettinger, Jeff Larson 
Nathan Toronto, Steven Whiting 
COSPONSORS 
Institute of Global Cultural Studies 
Binghamton University, State University of New York 
Center for the Preservation of Ancient Religious Texts 
Brigham Young University 

Page 5:
Al-Ghazali 
The Incoherence 
of the Philosophers 
A parallel English-Arabic text 
translated, introduced, and annotated by 
Michael E. Marmura 
Brigham Young University Press • Provo, Utah * 2000 

Page 6:
©1997, 2000 by Brigham Young University Press. All rights reserved. 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA 
Ghazzali, 1058-1111. 
[Tahafut al-falasifah. English] 
The incoherence of the philosophers = Tahafut al-falasifah: 
a parallel English-Arabic text I translated, introduced, and annotated 
by Michael E. Marmura. — 2nd ed. 
p. cm.— (Islamic translation series) 
1. Philosophy—Early works to 1800. 2. Methodology—Early works to 1800. 
3. Faith and reason—Islam—Early works to 1800. 4. Islam—Doctrines. 
I. Marmura, Michael E., 1929- . II. Title. III. Series. 
B753.G33T3313 2000 
297.2'61^-dc21 97-21195 
CIP 
ISBN 0-8425-2466-5 
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. 
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 07 06 05 04 03 02 01 
Second Edition 

Page 7:
To my brother Aziz 
—M. Marmura 

Page 8:
Contents 
Foreword xi 
Acknowledgments xiii 
Translator's Introduction—English xv 
Translator's Introduction—Arabic xxix 
'Author's Introduction: [The religious preface] 1 
[A first] introduction 4 
[A second] introduction ; . 5 
[A third] introduction 7 
[A fourth] introduction 8 
[Author's table of contents] 10 
[Part One] 
[First] Discussion: On refuting their doctrine of the world's past eternity 12 
The [philosophers'] first [proof] 13 
[The philosophers'] second proof . . 30 
[The philosophers'] third proof ... 39 
[The philosophers'] fourth proof 40 
[Second] Discussion: On refuting their statement on the 47 
post-eternity of the world, time, and motion '; ', ' : : 

Page 9:
vm Contents 
[Third] Discussion: On showing their obfuscation in saying 55 
that God is the world's enactor and maker . . . 
Regarding the first [aspect] 56 
The second aspect 60 
The third aspect 64 
[Fourth] Discussion: On showing their inability 78 
to prove the existence of the Maker of the world 
[Fifth] Discussion: On showing their inability to prove 84 
that God is one . . . 
[Sixth] Discussion: [On the divine attributes] 96 
[Seventh] Discussion: On refuting their statement that 110 
the First cannot share with another in terms of genus . . . 
[Eighth] Discussion: On refuting their statement that the 116 
existence of the First is simple . . . 
[Ninth] Discussion: On showing their inability to sustain 119 
a proof that the First is not a body 
[Tenth] Discussion: On their inability to show that the world 123 
has a maker and a cause 
[Eleventh] Discussion: On showing the impotence of those 125 
among them who perceive that the First knows other[s] and knows 
the genera and species in a universal way 
[Twelfth] Discussion: On showing their inability to prove 13| 
that He also knows Himself 
[Thirteenth] Discussion: On refuting their statement that 134 
God. . . does not know the particulars divisible in terms of temporal 
division into what is, what was, and what will be 
[Fourteenth] Discussion: On their inability to set a proof 144 
[to show] that heaven is an animal that obeys God. . . through 
its circular motion 

Page 10:
Contents 
[Fifteenth] Discussion: On refuting what they mentioned 
concerning the purpose that moves heaven j, 
[Sixteenth] Discussion: On refuting their statement that the 
of the heavens know all the particulars that occur in this world 
[Part Two: The Natural Sciences] 
[Introduction] 
[Seventeenth] Discussion: [On causality and miracles] 
[Eighteenth] Discussion: On their inability to sustain 
a rational demonstration [proving] that the human soul is a 
selfsubsistent spiritual substance . . . 
The first [proof] 
A second proof 
A third proof 
A fourth proof 
A fifth proof 
A sixth proof 
A seventh proof 
An eighth proof 
A ninth proof 
A tenth proof 
[Nineteenth] Discussion: On refuting their statement 
that it is impossible for human souls to undergo annihilation . . 
[Twentieth] Discussion: On refuting their denial of 
bodily resurrection . . . 
The Book's Conclusion 
• • • 
Notes to the English Text 
Notes to the Arabic Text 
Index 

Page 11:
Foreword 
The Islamic Translation Series: Philosophy, Theology, and Mysticism 
(hereafter ITS) is designed not only to further scholarship in Islamic 
studies but, by encouraging the translation of Islamic texts into the tech­
nical language of contemporary Western scholarship, to assist in the 
integration of Islamic studies into Western academia and to promote 
global perspectives in the disciplines to which it is devoted. If this goal is 
achieved, it will not be for the first time: Historians well know that, dur­
ing the so-called Middle Ages, a portion of the philosophical, scientific, 
and mathematical wealth of the Islamic tradition entered into and greatly 
enriched the West. Even Christian theology was affected, as is brilliantly 
evidenced in the works of St. Thomas Aquinas and other scholastics. 
Manuscripts submitted to ITS for consideration are, of course, evalu­
ated without regard to the religious, methodological, or political prefer­
ences of the translators or to their gender or national origins. The translator 
of each text, not the editors of the series nor the members of the advisory 
board, is solely responsible for the volume in question. 
On behalf of Daniel C. Peterson, the managing editor, and members 
of the advisory board, I wish to express deep appreciation to the cospon-
soring institutions for their gracious support of this project. Special 
thanks are due to the Center for the Preservation of Ancient Religious 
Texts of Brigham Young University and to the Institute of Global Cul­
tural Studies of Binghamton University and its director, Ali A. Mazrui. 
—PARVIZ MOREWEDGE 
Editor-in-Chief 
,•• Binghamton, New York 
— xi — 

Page 12:
Xll Foreword 
Brigham Young University and its Center for the Preservation of Ancient 
Religious Texts are pleased to sponsor and publish the Islamic Translation 
Series: Philosophy, Theology, and Mysticism (ITS). We wish to express our 
appreciation to the editor-in-chief of ITS, Parviz Morewedge, for joining 
us in this important project. We are especially grateful to James L. and 
Beverley Sorenson of Salt Lake City for their generous support, which 
made ITS possible, and to the Ashton Family Foundation of Orem, Utah, 
which kindly provided additional funding so that we might continue. 
Islamic civilization represents nearly fourteen centuries of intense 
intellectual activity, and believers in Islam number in the hundreds of 
millions. The texts that will appear in the ITS are among the treasures 
of this great culture. But they are more than that. They are properly the 
inheritance of all the peoples of the world. As an institution of The 
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Brigham Young University 
is honored to assist in making these texts available to many for the first 
time. In doing so, we hope to serve our fellow human beings, of all creeds 
and cultures. We also follow the admonition of our own tradition, to 
"seek . . . out of the best books words of wisdom," believing, indeed, that 
"the glory of God is intelligence." 
—DANIEL C. PETERSON 
Executive Editor 
Brigham Young University 
A NOTE ON SPELLING 
In this work, terms of Arabic derivation found in Webster's Third New Inter­
national Dictionary generally follow the first spelling given therein and are 
treated as regular English words. Otherwise, Arabic or Persian words and 
proper names have been transliterated following, with few exceptions, the 
standard recommended by the International Journal of Middle East Studies. 

Page 13:
Acknowledgments 
I owe a debt of thanks to Professors Parviz Morewedge and Daniel C. 
Peterson for their efforts expended in scrutinizing the present work and 
for their helpful comments; to Professor Fred C. Pinnegar for his careful 
reading of the English portion of this work and for pointing out ambigu­
ities in the translation; to Mr. Steven Whiting, Mr. Kyle Hettinger, and 
Mr. Steven Dyches for their labors for their labors in preparing both the 
Arabic text and the translation for the printers, for help in preparing the 
index, and for many judicious suggestions; to my student, Mr. Timothy 
Gianotti, for reading and commenting on an early draft of the translation; 
and to my wife, Elizabeth, for her encouragement and for reading and 
commenting on sections of the translation. 
I owe a special debt of thanks to Professor Paul Spade of Indiana Uni­
versity for making a careful comparative reading of the two texts, correct­
ing grammatical errors, and making invaluable suggestions (editorial 
and linguistic) for the improvement of this second edition. Last but not 
least, I offer my thanks to Mr. Morgan Davis, Mr. Glen Cooper, Mr. Nathan 
Toronto, and Mrs. Elizabeth Watkins of the Islamic Translation staff of 
the Middle Eastern Texts Initiative at Brigham Young University for 
examining the text and offering suggestions for its improvement. 
I also take this opportunity to pay tribute to my older brother Aziz 
who, very many years ago, was the first to instill in me a love of philosophy 
and whose sacrifices made my university education possible. It is to him 
that this work is dedicated. 
—MICHAEL E. MARMURA 
Toronto, February 2000 
— xni -

Page 14:
Translator's Introduction 
i 
Al-Ghazali's Tahafut al-falasifa (The incoherence of the philosophers) 
marks a turning point in the intellectual and religious history of medieval 
Islam. It brought to a head a conflict between Islamic speculative theology 
(kalam) and philosophy (falsafa) as it undertook to refute twenty philosoph­
ical doctrines. Seventeen are condemned as heretical innovations, three as 
totally opposed to Islamic belief, and those upholding them as outright 
infidels. Not that the philosophers it condemned were atheists—far from 
it. Their entire philosophical system rested on affirming the existence of 
God, from whom all other existents emanated. But, according to the 
Islamic philosophers, these existents emanated as the necessary conse­
quence of the divine essence. As al-Ghazali saw it, this meant that God 
produces the world by necessity in the same way that an inanimate object 
like the sun was said to produce its light by its very nature—by its essence, 
necessarily. It meant for him the denial of the divine attributes of life, 
will, power, and knowledge. Denuded of these attributes, he maintained, 
the God of the philosophers was not the God of the Qur°an. At issue was 
not the question of God's existence, but the nature of the godhead. 
The Tahafut certainly put Islamic philosophy on the defensive in a way 
that it had never been before. Paradoxically, however, it also served to 
make it better known in the Islamic world. It brought to the fore the con-
llict between philosophy and more traditional Islamic belief. But perhaps 
more to the point, in order to refute the Islamic philosophers, al-Ghazali 
had to explain them. He explained them so clearly and so well that he 
rendered philosophical ideas accessible to nonphilosophers. Inadver­
tently, so to speak, the Tahafut helped spread philosophical ideas, as it also 
set a new tradition in kalam. After al-Ghazali, no Islamic theologian 
worth his salt avoided detailed discussion of the philosophical theories 

Page 15:
xvi Translator's Introduction 
al-Ghazali had criticized. Kalam thereafter became, as it had never been 
before, thoroughly involved with the theories of the fa lasifa. 
The Tahafut also marks a high point in the history of medieval Arabic 
thought because of its intellectual caliber. Although its motivation is 
religious and theological, it makes its case through closely argued criti­
cisms that are ultimately philosophical. A logical critique, largely of 
the emanative metaphysics, causal theory, and psychology of Avicenna 
(Ibn Sina, d. 1037), it is incisive and thorough. It is true that theological 
criticism of philosophy was not entirely new in medieval Islam: one does 
encounter prior to al-Ghazali kalam criticisms of philosophical ideas. But 
one does not encounter anything like the comprehensive, sustained cri­
tique of the Tahafut—a work entirely devoted to refuting the philosophers. 
Whatever its failings—some of these shown by the answer Averroes (Ibn 
Rushd, d. 1198) gave to it in his Tahafut al-Tahafut (The incoherence of the 
Incoherence)—it remains a brilliant, incisive critique. 
II 
Abu Hamid Muhammad ibn Muhammad al-Tusi al-Ghazali, perhaps 
the best known of medieval Islam's religious intellectuals, was trained as 
an Islamic lawyer (faqih) and theologian (mutakallim) and became a noted 
Islamic mystic (sufi). He was born in 1058 in the city or district of Tus, in 
northeast Persia. He studied in maddris, religious colleges that focused on 
the teaching oflslamic law, first in Tus, then for a short period injurjan on 
the Caspian Sea, and then in 1077 at a major madrasa in Nishapur. There 
he was taught by Imam al-Haramayn al-Juwayni (d. 1085), a noted lawyer 
of the school of al-Shafici (d. 820) and the then leading theologian of the 
school of al-Ash°ari (d. 935). In law, al-Ghazali was a Shaficite; in kalam, 
he was an Ash'arite. 
Ashcarism, by the eleventh century, was becoming the dominant school 
of kalam. It subscribed to a metaphysics of transient atoms and accidents, 
from which material bodies are composed. It regarded all temporal exis-
tents as the direct creation of God, decreed by His eternal attribute of 
will and enacted by His attribute of power. What humans habitually 
regard as sequences of natural causes and effects are in reality concomi­
tant events whose constant association is arbitrarily decreed by the divine 
will. Between created things, there is no necessary causal connection— 
indeed, no causal interaction at all. God is the sole cause: all events are 
His direct creation. There is no inherent necessity in the uniformity 
of nature. Hence, when at certain times in history God interrupts this 

Page 16:
Translator's Introduction xvii 
uniformity by creating a miracle on behalf of a prophet or holy man, no 
contradiction ensues. In his works of kaldm, al-Ghazali ardently defended 
this atomist-occasionalist doctrine on logical and epistemological grounds. 
For some six years after the death of al-Juwayni, al-Ghazali spent much 
of his time at the court-camp of Nizam al-Mulk (d. 1092), the vizier of the 
Seljuk sultans, but seems to have also taught in Nishapur. He became 
known as a distinguished scholar and author of works on Islamic law. In 
1091, at the invitation of Nizam al-Mulk, he became the professor of law at 
the Ni^dmiyya in Baghdad. This was the most prestigious of a number of 
maddris instituted by Nizam al-Mulk (hence their name Ni^dmiyyas) in var­
ious eastern Islamic cities for the teaching of Islamic law according to the 
school of al-Shafici. These colleges were intended in part to train scholars 
to counter the religious propaganda of the rulers of Egypt, the Fatimid 
caliphs. For in the eleventh century the Islamic world was divided, with 
two opposing caliphates—the "orthodox" Sunni Abbasid caliphate in 
Baghdad, and the Shicite Fatimid caliphate in Cairo. The caliph in Bagh­
dad, who wielded moral and religious authority rather than actual politi­
cal power, stood as a symbol of Sunni Islam. Real power rested with the 
Seljuk Turks, nomadic warriors who had occupied Baghdad in 1055. But 
the Seljuks had converted to Islam in its Sunni form, and their power was 
legitimized by the Sunni Abbasid caliph. There was hence an Abbasid-
Seljuk establishment, and al-Ghazali's appointment at the Nigdmiyya of 
Baghdad made him part of it. Significantly, one of works he wrote during 
this period was Fadd'ih al-bdtiniyya (Scandals of the esoterics), a critique 
of the esoteric (bdtini) doctrine of the Ismacili Fatimids. This work was 
also entitled Al-Mustaghiri, after the Abbasid caliph, al-Mustazhir, who 
had asked al-Ghazali to write a refutation of Ismacili doctrine. 
It was during this period, which extended from 1091 to 1095, that 
al-Ghazali wrote his Tahafut and three other works closely related to it. 
The first of these was Maqdsid al-faldsifa (The aims of the philosophers), 
an exposition in Arabic that closely follows Avicenna's Persian work, 
Danesh nameh cAldli (The book of science dedicated to cAlaD al-Dawla). In 
the introduction of this work and at its conclusion, al-Ghazali states that 
he wrote this work of exposition to explain the philosophers' theories as a 
prelude to his refuting them in the Tahafut. (Strangely enough, in the 
Tahafut there is never any mention of the Maqdsid al-faldsifa, nor any 
allusion to it.) The second work, Miyar al-cilm (The standard for knowl­
edge), is an exposition of Avicennan logic, the most comprehensive of 
such expositions that al-Ghazali wrote. This logic, for al-Ghazali, was 
philosophically neutral, no more than a tool for knowledge, differing 

Page 17:
XVlll Translator's Introduction 
from the logic used by the theologians only in its vocabulary and greater 
elaboration and refinement. He urged his fellow theologians and lawyers 
to adopt it. The Mijar was written expressly as an appendix to the Tahafut. 
For, as al-Ghazali proclaimed in introducing his Tahafut, he would 
be using the very logic of the philosophers in refuting them. The third 
work, a sequel to the Tahafut, is his Al-iqtisad fi al-i ctiqdd (Moderation 
in belief), an exposition of Ashcarite theology. In the Tahafut al-Ghazali 
intended to refute and negate; in the Iqtisdd, to build and affirm what he 
declared to be true doctrine, a point to which I will shortly return. 
Probably around the time of his move to Baghdad, al-Ghazali under­
went a period of skepticism. As he recorded in his autobiography, written 
a few years before his death, he examined the various sciences he had 
studied but found that they did not yield certainty. Nor could he trust the 
senses, which, he maintained, deceive us. The faculty of sight, he wrote, 
"would look at the star and would see it small, the size of a dinar, but then 
astronomical proofs would show that it is greater in magnitude than the 
earth." Distrust of the senses, he then relates, extended itself to reason. 
He began to doubt the basis of all reason, the self-evident truths of logic. 
For two months, he states, he remained in this "illness," until in His 
mercy God restored to him his faith in reason. 
In 1095, al-Ghazali underwent another spiritual crisis that changed the 
course of his life. This came to a head in July when, for a period of time, he 
lost his ability to speak. Part of the reason, he stated in his autobiography, 
was that he came to realize that his motivation in pursuing his career was 
worldly glory, rather than genuine religious impulse. But he also hinted 
at a dissatisfaction with the purely doctrinal and intellectual approaches 
to religion. These, he maintained, bypassed the heart of the matter, that 
which is directly experiential in religion: the dhawq, a Sufi term that liter­
ally means "taste." He had read the works of the Islamic mystics and 
become convinced that their path was the one that led to true knowledge. 
He made the decision to forsake his career and follow their path. 
After making arrangements for his family, he left Baghdad and went 
first to Damascus, where he secluded himself in the minaret of its great 
mosque. Next he went to Jerusalem, where again he secluded himself 
in the Dome of the Rock. He then traveled to Hebron, to Madina, and to 
Mecca. For some eleven years he lived the life of asceticism, pursuing the 
mystic's way. It was also during this period that he composed his magnum 
opus: his Ihya3 culum al-din (The revivification of the sciences of religion). 
In this work, as well as other shorter treatises he wrote, he strove to 
reconcile traditional Islamic beliefs with Sufi teaching. This involved 

Page 18:
Translator's Introduction xix 
his reinterpretation of what Sufis declared to be the ultimate mystical 
experience: "annihilation" (al-fand") in the divine essence, a declaration 
that for the more traditional Muslim violated the fundamental Islamic 
concept of divine transcendence. For al-Ghazali, the end of the mystical 
experience is proximity (qurb) to the divine attributes, which in Ashcarite 
dogma are "additional" to the divine essence. The divine essence, at least 
in this world, remains for al-Ghazali beyond any human experience, 
although he adheres to the Ashcarite doctrine that God can be "seen" 
in the hereafter. He further suggests that the mystical experience of 
"annihilation" consists in seeing nothing in existence except the unity 
of all things and hence losing experience of oneself. In the Ihya° he also 
sought a synthesis between Islamic theological principles, the Aristotelian 
doctrine of the mean, and the virtues expounded by the Sufis, the highest 
of which is the love of God. 
In 1106 al-Ghazali returned to teaching, first in Nishapur and then 
in Tus, until his death in 1111. His writings during this period included 
theological and mystical works, his autobiography, and a major book in 
Islamic law, Al-mustasfa min usul al-din (The choice essentials of the prin­
ciples of religion). Needless to say, all the works he wrote after he left 
Baghdad, which include the voluminous Ihya\ are basic for understand­
ing the religious views of this remarkable thinker and are certainly not 
without intrinsic philosophical interest and value. But speaking strictly 
from the point of view of the history of philosophy, the pivotal work 
remains his detailed critique of the Islamic philosophers, his Tahafut. 
Ill 
In the Tahafut, al-Ghazali singles out for his criticism al-Farabi (d. 950) 
and Avicenna (d. 1037) as the two most reliable Islamic exponents of 
Aristotle's philosophy. It should be stressed, however, that while these two 
philosophers were Aristotelian, they were also Neoplatonists who had 
formulated two closely related but quite distinct emanative schemes. There 
are, moreover, differences between these two thinkers, not only in their 
emanative schemes, but also in their theories of the soul, epistemologies, 
and eschatologies. At the same time, however, there is overlap in their 
ideas, so that many of al-Ghazali's criticisms apply to both. 
The main criticisms of al-Ghazali, however, have Avicenna's philoso­
phy as their direct target. Thus, to give only a few concrete examples, 
the third discussion includes a detailed critique of Avicenna's triadic 
emanative scheme, not the dyadic scheme of al-Farabi. The doctrine 

Page 19:
Translator's Introduction 
that God knows only universals, or, rather, particulars "in a universal 
way," criticized and rejected in the thirteenth discussion, is a distinctly 
Avicennan theory. Again, al-Ghazali devotes the last three discussions of 
the Tahafut to a detailed critique of Avicenna's theory of an immaterial 
soul that denies bodily resurrection, not the theory of al-Farabi. There are 
differences between the psychological theories of these two philosophers 
that include a marked difference between their eschatologies. Both 
maintain that it is only the immaterial soul that is immortal. But while 
Avicenna maintains that all human souls are immortal (living a life of 
bliss or misery in the hereafter, depending on their performance in this 
life), al-Farabi in his extant writings confines immortality to the few. 
The Tahafut divides into two parts. The first, consisting of the first 
through sixteenth discussions, is devoted to metaphysical questions; the 
second, containing the seventeenth through twentieth discussions, covers 
the natural sciences. Two of the philosophical theories that al-Ghazali 
condemns as utterly irreligious (not merely heretical innovations) are 
discussed in the metaphysical part. These are the theory of a pre-eternal 
world and the theory that God knows only the universal characteristics of 
particulars. The third doctrine condemned as irreligious—namely, the 
Avicennan doctrine of the human soul that denies bodily resurrection— 
belongs to the second part. It is debated in the eighteenth through twen­
tieth discussions but more specifically in the twentieth discussion. This 
second part on natural science begins (in the seventeenth discussion) 
with al-Ghazali's famous critique of causality and concludes with the 
lengthy discussion of Avicenna's psychology. In including psychology as 
part of natural science, al-Ghazali follows the practice of the Islamic 
philosophers, who in turn follow Aristotle. 
The theory of the world's pre-eternity debated in the first discussion 
is the longest in the Tahafut. At the heart of this debate is the question of 
the nature of divine causality. As al-Ghazali explains it, the philosophers 
maintain that the world is the necessitated effect of an eternally necessi­
tating cause and hence must be eternal. At issue here is the question 
of whether God acts by the necessity of His nature or voluntarily. For 
al-Ghazali, the doctrine of an eternal world means the denial of the 
divine attribute of will. The philosophers must demonstrate the impossi­
bility of a world created in time by an eternal will, but he tries to show 
that they fail. At most, their theory of a pre-eternal world has not 
been demonstrated. It also leads to absurd consequences, he argues. 
Al-Ghazali affirms that the world and time were created together at a 
finite moment in the past through the choice of the eternal divine will. 

Page 20:
Translator's Introduction xxi 
The second "irreligious doctrine" debated in the thirteenth discus­
sion is Avicenna's theory that God knows particulars only "in a universal 
way." It should perhaps be said here that Avicenna makes a distinction 
between celestial and terrestrial particulars. (The distinction is implicit 
but is not explicitly discussed in al-Ghazali's otherwise masterly exposi­
tion of Avicenna's theory). For Avicenna, a celestial particular like the 
sun, unlike a terrestrial particular, represents the only member of its 
species. As such, God knows that one sun exists and knows its universal 
qualities. In this sense, one might be able to argue that God knows the 
particular sun. But the concern is with the terrestrial world, where the 
particular is not the only member of its species. More specifically, the con­
cern is with the individual human and the individual human act. These, 
as al-Ghazali pointedly shows, cannot in Avicenna's system be known by 
God individually. This theory, he argues, has not been demonstrated and 
plainly contradicts Qur3anic assertions about divine omniscience. 
The case is similar with Avicenna's doctrine of the soul that denies 
bodily resurrection. Al-Ghazali argues in detail that the theory of the 
soul's immateriality, on which Avicenna's denial is based, has not been 
demonstrated. He then argues that even if one were to concede that the 
soul is immaterial, bodily resurrection would still be possible. The lan­
guage of the Qur^an affirming bodily resurrection, he points out, is 
explicit and must be accepted literally, not metaphorically. The inter­
pretation of scriptural language as merely metaphor is incumbent if and 
only if scriptural assertions are demonstrated—in the strictest sense of 
demonstration—to be impossible. Otherwise they must be accepted in 
their literal sense. (Elsewhere in his mystical writings al-Ghazali insists 
that these statements have a deeper metaphorical and symbolic sense, 
beyond the literal. But this deeper sense must be based on their literal 
acceptance.) This criterion of demonstrability underlies the whole argu­
ment of the Tahafut. 
IV 
Al-Ghazali explains the purpose for his writing the Tahafut in a reli­
gious preface and four short introductions. These relatively brief state­
ments are extremely important for understanding the intention of this 
work. The religious preface reveals a "proximate cause" for his writing 
the book, as he inveighs in it against certain pseudo-intellectuals of his 
time. These, he says in effect, have been so impressed by such "high-
sounding names such as 'Socrates,' 'Hippocrates,' 'Plato,' 'Aristotle,' and 

Page 21:
Translator's Introduction 
their likes" that they have become mere imitators of such philosophers 
and their followers, without having any real knowledge of their thought. 
Moreover, they 'ave used the example of philosophers to rationalize their 
own disregard for the rituals and obligations imposed by the religious 
law, opting, in effect, for unbelief (kufr). He thus has undertaken to write 
this book, he states, to show "the incoherence of [the philosophers'] 
beliefs and the contradiction of their metaphysical statements, relating 
at the same time their doctrine as it actually is, so as to make it clear to 
those who embrace unbelief in God through imitation that all the signifi­
cant thinkers, past and present, agree in believing in God and the last 
day." In a tone of accommodation, adopted perhaps to stress the point 
that the "imitators" of the philosophers have totally misunderstood them, 
he states that his differences with the philosophers "reduce to matters of 
detail extraneous to those two pivotal points." These "matters of detail," 
however, turn out to be quite fundamental: they include the three philo­
sophical doctrines he condemns as utterly irreligious, whose supporters, 
as he declares, should be punishable by death. 
In the introductions that follow, he makes a number of basic points. 
His quarrel, he states, is not with the philosophers' mathematics, astro­
nomical sciences, or logic, but only with those of their theories that con­
travene the principles of religion. His task, he further states, is not to 
defend any specific theological doctrine. On the contrary, in refuting 
the philosophers he will use against them arguments of various Islamic 
theological schools. His task, he explains, is simply to refute the philoso­
phers, to show that, contrary to their claims, their theories contradicting 
religious principles have not been demonstrated; they have failed to ful­
fill the conditions for demonstration which they themselves had set down 
in their logical works. His assertion that the Tahafut is intended only to 
refute is repeated at the conclusion of his critique of the philosophers' 
four proofs for the world's pre-eternity. He writes: 
We have not endeavored to defend a particular doctrine, and as 
such we have not departed from the objective of this book. We will 
not argue exhaustively for the doctrine of the temporal origination [of 
the world], since our purpose is to refute their claim of knowing [its] 
pre-eternity. 
As regards the true doctrine, we will write a book concerning it after 
completing this one—if success, God willing, comes to our aid—and 
will name it The Principles of Belief. We will engage in it in affirmation, 
just as we have devoted ourselves in this book to destruction. 

Page 22:
Translator's Introduction 
Al-Ghazali thus makes it quite clear that the Tahdfut is intended only 
to refute, not to defend any specific theological doctrine. He also tells 
us that he will write a sequel to the Tahdfut in which he will affirm true 
doctrine. These two points call for comment. 
V 
In his famous response to al-Ghazali, his Tahdfut al-Tahdfut, Averroes 
repeatedly refers to al-Ghazali's arguments as Ashcarite. And it is true 
that more often than not al-Ghazali argues from an Ashcarite theological 
base and affirms Ashcarite theological positions. But this is his preroga­
tive. When he does this, he does it as part of his endeavor to refute. He 
does not develop a theological system in the Tahdfut. In one of his later 
works, Jawdhir al-Qur'dn (The gems of the Qur'an) he mentions the 
Tahdfut with two Ashcarite works as books intended to defend the faith. 
But while intended to defend the faith, the Tahdfut, strictly speaking, is not 
an Ashcarite "manual," a systematically argued presentation of Ashcarite 
doctrine. Moreover, al-Ghazali sometimes defends non-Ashcarite positions 
in this work. He defends them, to be sure, as I will shortly indicate, for 
the sake of argument, as a means for refuting the philosophers. Still, he 
defends them. Before turning to this point, however, a word is necessary 
about the title of the work he wrote intended as a sequel to the Tahdfut, 
the work mentioned in the quotation above. The title he gives is Qawa'id 
al-'aqd'id (The principles of belief). An Ashcarite work bearing this title 
constitutes one of the books of al-Ghazali's Ihyd'. But the work that best 
fulfills the purpose stated in his 'Tahdfut is another Ashcarite work— 
namely, Al-iqtisddfi al-i'liqdd. It is not that the two works do not com­
plement each other; but the Iqtisdd, written in Baghdad shortly after the 
writing of the Tahdful and before the Ihyd', refers directly to the Tahdfut 
and is closer to it in spirit and in terms of the issues with which it deals. 
Significantly, in the Iqtisdd, al-Ghazali states that its concern is with 
qawa'id al-'aqd'id, "the principles of belief." Perhaps more to the point, his 
statement that he will write a book in which he will engage "in affirma­
tion" rather than "destruction" occurs, as already noted, at the end of the 
critique of the philosophers' first proof for the pre-eternity of the world. 
This statement comes after his assertion: "We will not argue exhaus­
tively for the temporal origination [of the world] since our purpose is to 
refute their claim of knowing [its] pre-eternity." Such exhaustive argu­
ment will be included in the book of affirmation he intends to write. The 
question of the world's origin, however, is not discussed exhaustively in 

Page 23:
XXIV Translator's Introduction 
the QawaHd, although one of the Tahafut's arguments against infinite 
events in the past is repeated. The discussion in the Iqtisad is by far the 
more detailed. In it al-Ghazali repeats his arguments in the Tahafut for 
the temporal creation of the world much more fully, although admittedly 
he does not add much to them. It is the Iqtisad, not the Qawacid, that is 
the sequel to the Tahafut. 
This returns the discussion to the question of al-Ghazali's defense of 
non-Ashcarite positions. The two most important instances occur in his 
discussions of causality and of the doctrine of the soul's immateriality. 
I will begin with the causal question. 
There are abundant statements in the Tahafut indicating that its 
author subscribes to the Ashcarite occasionalist doctrine that confines 
all causal action to God. Nonetheless, in the seventeenth discussion, in 
which al-Ghazali argues for the possibility of certain types of miracles 
whose possibility is rejected by the Islamic philosophers, he defends 
two different causal theories. He begins with his famous declaration and 
defense of the Ashcarite causal theory: "The connection between what 
is habitually believed to be a cause and what is habitually believed to 
be an effect is not necessary, according to us." The connection between 
such events, he then states, "is due to God's prior decree, who creates 
them side by side, not to its being necessary in itself, incapable of sepa­
ration." Observation, he then argues, shows only concomitance—never 
any necessary causal connection. In the course of debating this question, 
however, al-Ghazali puts into the mouth of his opponents an objection to 
this denial of necessary causal connection. According to this objection, 
such a denial leads inevitably to absurdities, to a confused, haphazard, 
irregular course of events. Al-Ghazali answers quite emphatically that 
such a consequence does not follow. For God in His goodness has 
ordained a regular natural pattern (which in itself is not necessary but 
is inevitable because it is decreed by God) and has created in humanity 
knowledge that this uniformity will continue and will only be interrupted 
when a miracle takes place—an event also decreed and created by God. 
The opponent's contention that absurd consequences would result from 
the denial of causal necessity in things, al-Ghazali declares, is hence an 
exercise in "sheer vilification" (tashnic mahd). To avoid being subjected 
to such vilification, however, al-Ghazali proposes another possible causal 
theory that would still allow the possibility of those miracles the philoso­
phers deem impossible. 
This second causal theory proposed by al-Ghazali is perhaps best 
described as a modified Aristotelian theory. Created things would have 

Page 24:
Translator's Introduction XXV 
causal efficacy, provided one maintains that the divine act remains vol­
untary, not necessitated by the divine essence. Moreover, according to this 
second theory, divine power is such that it can intervene in the natural 
order, creating new causal conditions that produce the miracle. Now 
al-Ghazali elaborates this theory and insists that it is also possible. 
Hence he holds that there are two possible causal theories that allow the 
possibility of miracles. But while he holds both to be possible, he does not 
state that they are compossible. For they are mutually exclusive. 
To which, then, of the two theories does al-Ghazali actually subscribe? 
It is here that the Iqtisad provides the answer. For in it al-Ghazali affirms 
without any equivocation the Ashcarite causal theory. Divine power is 
pervasive and is the direct cause of each and every created existent and 
each and every temporal event. Inanimate things have no causal power 
(a point he also asserts more than once in the Tahafut). Power belongs 
only to the animate. But this is a power which God "creates" in humanity. 
Created power, however, has no causal efficacy. It is created simulta­
neously with the event human beings ordinarily, but erroneously, regard 
as the effect of their created power. This effect is also the direct creation 
of divine power. (This is an expression of the Ashcarite doctrine of acqui­
sition [kasb] and finds corroboration in the Qawd'id). Human power and 
the effect associated with it are both the simultaneous creations of God. 
Causal action belongs exclusively to divine power. This necessarily negates 
the second causal theory, the modified Aristotelian theory, introduced in the 
Tahafut. Whatever other reason there might be for introducing it in 
the Tahafut, it is clearly introduced there for the sake of argument, to 
demonstrate that even if one allows a measure of causal efficacy in things, 
one can still allow the possibility (denied by the philosophers) of certain 
kinds of miracles. 
Turning to the question of the immateriality of the human soul, 
al-Ghazali, as mentioned earlier, devotes an entire section (the eighteenth 
discussion) to it. He offers a detailed refutation of the proofs Avicenna 
had given for its immateriality, arguing that none of these proofs (ten in 
number) has demonstrated such an immateriality. The doctrine of an 
immaterial soul is the basis for Avicenna's insistence that there is no 
bodily resurrection. In the twentieth discussion, devoted to the question 
of bodily resurrection, however, al-Ghazali does not choose to defend 
the Ashcarite doctrine of the human soul that denies its immateriality. 
Instead, he strives to show that even if one accepts a doctrine of an 
immaterial soul, one can maintain the possibility of bodily resurrection. 
Moreover, he states that a doctrine of an immaterial soul need not be 

Page 25:
XXVI Translator's Introduction 
inconsistent with Islamic teaching, that it has support in the Qur3an. His 
presentation of the possibility of an immaterial soul is so persuasive in 
the Tahafut that one is prone to believe that this is the doctrine to which 
al-Ghazali subscribes. In the Iqtisad, however, he defends an Ashcarite 
doctrine of a material human soul and states quite explicitly that in the 
Tahafut he defended a doctrine of an immaterial soul only for the sake of 
argument, in order to refute the philosophers. 
These are the two notable instances where he defends a doctrine 
to which he does not actually subscribe. It is also clear that he defends 
them for the sake of argument, as a means to refute the philosophers. In 
this he is not inconsistent with his declarations that the Tahafut's pri­
mary aim is to refute. 
VI 
The term tahafut has been variously translated—for example, as 
destructio by the Latins, "inconsistency," "disintegration," "collapse," 
as well as "incoherence," by modern scholars. A common meaning is 
"collapse," or "collapsing," sometimes with the nuance of rushing headlong 
and crowding to fall into disaster, into hellfire. It also is used to convey 
the idea of rushing and swarming into combat. The term also relates to haft, 
discourse that is not well thought out, that is unintelligible, incoherent. 
M. Bouyges, in the introduction to his edition of the text, gives a succinct 
discussion of the ways this term has been translated in English and other 
languages. He chose "incoherence" as perhaps conveying best what al-
Ghazali meant by the term tahafut. His reasons for this choice are quite 
convincing and hence I have followed him in the translation of the term. 
There have been two English translations of al-Ghazali's Tahafut. The 
first, published in 1954, is that of S. Van Den Bergh in his translation 
of Averroes's answer to al-Ghazali—namely, the Tahafut al-Tahafut—which 
embodies most of al-Ghazali's text. This translation (2 vols., London: 
Luzac, 1954), with its copious notes, is a veritable tour de force and is cer­
tainly a major contribution to the study of both al-Ghazali and Averroes. 
At the same time, however, it is not free from serious errors. The second 
translation, by S. Kamali (Lahore: Pakistan Philosophical Congress, 
1958), has for years served as a main introduction of this work to the 
English reader. Kamali's English version has the merit of conveying 
much of the argumentative flavor of the original—this in itself being 
a considerable achievement. This version, however, also has its share 
of inaccuracies and at times is more of a paraphrase than a translation. 

Page 26:
Translator's Introduction wn 
A text sometimes poses difficulties for the translator, not because its 
author is a bad writer, but because its author is a good one. Al-Ghazali 
is a master of Arabic prose. His style, however, is very personal and highly 
idiomatic; it carries with it nuances that are difficult to recapture in a 
translation. As such, the difficulties it often poses are not so much due to 
lack of clarity. For the most part, his presentation of complex and subtle 
arguments is remarkable for its clarity. But there are also lapses. Ambi­
guities do occur. And there are times when what is stated is so condensed 
that its intention is not immediately clear. There is also an ambiguity, 
frequently encountered in Arabic, relating to the use of pronouns, where 
the referents of these pronouns are not always immediately obvious. 
Hence, in translating the text, there is an ever-pressing need for clarifi­
cation. In places where lengthy explanations are needed, I have placed 
these in notes. But there are numerous places where lengthy explana­
tions are not needed. To place these in notes imposes unnecessary inter­
ruptions to the flow of the argument. For this reason, to clarify issues, I 
have made extensive use of square brackets. These include words or sen­
tences which are not explicitly stated in the text but are implicit therein. 
The Arabic text of the Tahafut is based on the edition of Maurice 
Bouyges (Beirut: Imprimerie Catholique, 1927). I have, however, intro­
duced new paragraphing, dictated by sense and flow of argument and 
determined also by the manner in which I thought it was best to para­
graph the translation. To help the reader, I have also added considerably 
to the sparse punctuation of the original edition, and also to the sparse 
gemination marks, the shaddas, over the letters. On the whole, I have 
followed the readings of Bouyges adopted in the body of the texts, but 
there are departures. I have chosen other manuscript readings given in 
Bouyges's apparatus criticus, the choice dictated by grammar and sense. 
These departures from Bouyges's edition have been placed between square 
brackets, with a note indicating the reading in the body of Bouyges's text. 
Some changes—and these are few—dictated by language and sense, are 
my own. These are placed in angular brackets, with notes indicating the 
reading in Bouyges's text. 

Page 27: [No Text Extracted]

Page 28: [No Text Extracted]

Page 29: [No Text Extracted]

Page 30: [No Text Extracted]

Page 31:
In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful 
[The Religious Preface] 
(1) We ask God in His majesty that transcends all bounds and His 
munificence that goes beyond all ends to shed upon us the lights of His 
guidance and to snatch away from us the darkness of waywardness and 
error; to make us among those who saw the truth as truth, preferring to 
5 pursue and follow its paths, and who saw the false as false, choosing to 
avoid and shun it; to bring us to the felicity He promised His prophets 
and saints; to make us attain that rapture and gladness, favored bliss 
and joy (once we depart from this abode of delusion) from whose heights 
the greatest ascents of the understanding stand low and from whose dis-
10 tanced stretches the utmost reaches of the arrows of the imagination 
waste away; to grant us, after arriving at the bliss of paradise and emerg­
ing from the terror of the judgment day, "that which neither eye has 
seen, nor ear heard, nor occurred to the heart of men," and that He may 
bestow His prayers and His assured peace upon our prophet, the chosen, 
15 Muhammad, the best of men, and upon his virtuous family and his com­
panions pure, keys of guidance and lanterns in the dark. 
(2) I have seen a group who, believing themselves in possession of 
a distinctiveness from companion and peer by virtue of a superior quick 
wit and intelligence, have rejected the Islamic duties regarding acts 
20 of worship, disdained religious rites pertaining to the offices of prayer 
and the avoidance of prohibited things, belittled the devotions and 
ordinances prescribed by the divine law, not halting in the face of its 
-I-

Page 32: [No Text Extracted]

Page 33:
2 Author's Introduction 
prohibitions and restrictions. On the contrary, they have entirely cast off 
the reins of religion through multifarious beliefs, following therein a 
troop "who repel away from God's way, intending to make it crooked, 
who are indeed disbelievers in the hereafter" [Qur'an 11:19]. 
J (3) There is no basis for their unbelief other than traditional, con­
ventional imitation, like the imitation of Jews and Christians, since their1 
upbringing and that of their offspring has followed a course other than 
the religion of Islam, their fathers and forefathers having [also] followed 
[conventional imitation], and no [basis] other than speculative investi-
10 gation, an outcome of their stumbling over the tails of sophistical doubts 
that divert from the direction of truth, and their being deceived by 
embellished imaginings akin to the glitter of the mirage, as has hap­
pened to groups of speculative thinkers, followers of heretical innovation 
and whim, in [their] investigation of beliefs and opinions. 
15 (4) The source of their unbelief is in their hearing high-sounding 
names such as "Socrates," "Hippocrates," "Plato," "Aristotle," and their 
likes and the exaggeration and misguidedness of groups of their followers 
in describing their minds; the excellence of their principles; the exactitude 
of their geometrical, logical, natural, and metaphysical sciences—and 
20 in [describing these as] being alone (by reason of excessive intelligence 
and acumen) [capable] of extracting these hidden things. [It is also in 
hearing] what [these followers] say about [their masters—namely,] that 
concurrent with the sobriety of their intellect and the abundance of their 
merit is their denial of revealed laws and religious confessions and their 
25 rejection of the details of religious and sectarian [teaching], believing 
them to be man-made laws and embellished tricks. 
(5) When this struck their hearing, that which was reported of [the 
philosophers'] beliefs finding agreement with their nature, they adorned 
themselves with the embracing of unbelief—siding with the throng of 
30 the virtuous, as they claim; affiliating with them; exalting themselves 
above aiding the masses and the commonality; and disdaining to be con­
tent with the religious beliefs of their forebears. [They have done this,] 
thinking that the show of cleverness in abandoning the [traditional] imi­
tation of what is true by embarking on the imitation of the false is a 
35 beauteous thing, being unaware that moving from one [mode of] imita­
tion to another is folly and confusedness. 
(6) What rank in God's world is there that is lower than the rank 
of one who adorns himself with the abandonment of the truth that is 
traditionally believed by the hasty embracing of the false as true, accept-
40 ing it without [reliable] report and verification? The imbeciles among the 

Page 34: [No Text Extracted]

Page 35:
3 Authpr's Introduction 
masses stand detached from the infamy of this abyss; for there is no crav­
ing in their nature to become clever by emulating those who follow the ways 
of error. Imbecility is thus nearer salvation than acumen severed [from 
religious belief]; blindness is closer to wholeness than cross-eyed sight. 
5 (7) When I perceived this vein of folly throbbing within these dim­
wits, I took it upon myself to write this book in refutation of the ancient 
philosophers, to show the incoherence of their belief and the contradic­
tion of their word in matters relating to metaphysics; to uncover the dan­
gers of their doctrine and its shortcomings, which in truth ascertainable 
10 are objects of laughter for the rational and a lesson for the intelligent—I 
mean the kinds of diverse beliefs and opinions they particularly hold that 
set them aside from the populace and the common run of men. [I will do 
this,] relating at the same time their doctrine as it actually is, so as to 
make it clear to those who embrace unbelief through imitation that all 
15 significant thinkers, past and present, agree in believing in God and the 
last day; that their differences reduce to matters of detail extraneous 
to those two pivotal points (for the sake of which the prophets, supported 
by miracles, have been sent); that no one has denied these two [beliefs] 
other than a remnant of perverse minds who hold lopsided opinions, who 
20 are neither noticed nor taken into account in the deliberations of the 
speculative thinkers, [but who are instead] counted only among the com­
pany of evil devils and in the throng of the dim-witted and inexperienced. 
[I will do this] so that whoever believes that adorning oneself with 
imitated unbelief shows good judgment and induces awareness of one's 
25 quick wit and intelligence would desist from his extravagance, as it will 
become verified for him that those prominent and leading philosophers 
he emulates are innocent of the imputation that they deny the religious 
laws; that [on the contrary] they believe in God and His messengers; but 
that they have fallen into confusion in certain details beyond these prin-
30 ciples, erring in this, straying from the correct path, and leading others 
astray. We will reveal the kinds of imaginings and vanities in which they 
have been deceived, showing all this to be unproductive extravagance. 
God, may He be exalted, is the patron of success in the endeavor to show 
what we intend to verify. 

Page 36: [No Text Extracted]

Page 37:
4 Author's Introduction 
(8) Let us now begin the book with introductions that express the 
pattern of discourse followed [therein], 
[A first] introduction 
(9) Let it be known that to plunge into narrating the differences 
among the philosophers would involve too long a tale. For their flounder-
5 ing about is lengthy, their disputes many, their views spread far apart, 
their ways divergent and convergent. Let us, then, restrict ourselves to 
showing the contradictions in the views of their leader, who is the 
philosopher par excellence and "the first teacher." For he has, as they 
claim, organized and refined their sciences, removed the redundant in 
19 their views, and selected what is closest to the principles of their capri­
cious beliefs—namely, Aristotle. He has answered all his predecessors— 
even his teacher, known among them as "the divine Plato," apologizing 
for disagreeing with his teacher by saying: "Plato is a friend and truth is 
a friend, but truth is a truer friend." 
15 (10) We have transmitted this story to let it be known that there is 
neither firm foundation nor perfection in the doctrine they hold; that 
they judge in terms of supposition and surmise, without verification 
or certainty; that they use the appearance of their mathematical and 
logical sciences as evidential proof for the truth of their metaphysical 
20 sciences, using [this] as a gradual enticement for the weak in mind. Had 
their metaphysical sciences been as perfect in demonstration, free from 
conjecture, as their mathematical, they would not have disagreed among 
themselves regarding [the former], just as they have not disagreed in 
their mathematical sciences. 
25 (11) Moreover, the words of the translators of the words of Aristotle 
are not free from corruption and change, requiring exegesis and inter­
pretation, so that this also has aroused conflict among them. The most 
reliable transmitters and verifiers among the philosophers in Islam 
are al-Farabi Abu Nasr and Ibn Sina. Let us, then, confine ourselves to 
30 refuting what these two have selected and deemed true of the doctrines 

Page 38: [No Text Extracted]

Page 39:
5 Author's Introduction 
of their leaders in error. For that which they have abandoned and 
scorned to pursue no one contests is error and needs no lengthy exami­
nation to refute. Let it, then, be known that we are confining ourselves to 
the [philosophers'] doctrines according to the transmission of these two 
5 men so that the discussion would not spread [far and wide] with the 
spread of doctrines. 
[A second] introduction 
(12) Let it be known, then, that the dispute between [the philoso­
phers] and others of the sects has three parts. 
(13) There is a part in which the dispute reduces to the purely verbal, 
10 as, for example, their naming the world's Creator—exalted be He above 
what they say—a substance, with their explanation of substance as that 
which does not exist in a subject—that is, [as] the self-subsisting that 
does not need that which substantiates it. They did not intend by sub­
stance, as their opponents intend, that which occupies space. 
15 (14) We will not plunge into a refutation of this because, once the 
meaning of self-subsistence becomes agreed upon, then the discussion 
regarding the use of the term "substance" to express this meaning 
becomes a lexical investigation. If language sanctions its use, then the 
permissibility of its use in religion reverts to investigations within the 
20 religious law. For the prohibiting and permitting of terms derives from 
what the outer meaning of the religious texts indicates. Now, you may 
say that this [type of] naming has been mentioned by the theologians in 
relation to the [divine] attributes but was not introduced by the lawyers 
in the discipline of the religious law. You must not, however, allow the 
25 true nature of things to become confused for you because of customs and 
formalities. For you now know that it is an investigation about the per­
missibility of uttering an expression whose meaning is true of the thing 
named. It is thus similar to investigating the permissibility of a certain 
act[—hence, within the province of the religious law]. 
30 (15) The second part is one where their doctrine does not clash 
with any religious principle and where it is not a necessity of the belief 
in the prophets and [God's] messengers, God's prayers be upon them, 
to dispute with them about it. An example of this is their statement: 

Page 40: [No Text Extracted]

Page 41:
6 Author's Introduction 
"The lunar eclipse consists in the obliteration of the moon's light due to 
the interposition of the earth between it and the sun, the earth being a 
sphere surrounded by the sky on all sides. Thus, when the moon falls in 
the earth's shadow, the sun's light is severed from it." Another example 
5 is their statement: "The solar eclipse means the presence of the lunar 
orb between the observer and the sun. This occurs when the sun and the 
moon are both at the two nodes at one degree." 
(16) This topic is also one into the refutation of which we shall not 
plunge, since this serves no purpose. Whoever thinks that to engage in a 
10 disputation for refuting such a theory is a religious duty harms religion 
and weakens it. For these matters rest on demonstrations—geometrical 
and arithmetical—that leave no room for doubt. Thus, when one who 
studies these demonstrations and ascertains their proofs, deriving 
thereby information about the time of the two eclipses [and] their extent 
15 and duration, is told that this is contrary to religion, [such an individual] 
will not suspect this [science, but] only religion. The harm inflicted on 
religion by those who defend it in a way not proper to it is greater than 
[the harm caused by] those who attack it in the way proper to it. As it has 
been said: "A rational foe is better than an ignorant friend." 
20 (17) If it is said that God's messenger—God's prayers and peace be 
upon him—said, "The sun and moon are two of God's signs that are 
eclipsed neither for the death nor the life of anyone; should you witness 
such [events], then hasten to the remembrance of God and prayer," how, 
then, does this agree with what [the philosophers] state? We say: 
25 (18) There is nothing in this that contradicts what they have stated, 
since there is nothing in it except the denial of the occurrence of the 
eclipse for the death or life of anyone and the command to pray when it 
occurs. Why should it be so remote for the religious law that commands 
prayer at noon and sunset to command as recommendable prayer at the 
30 occurrence of an eclipse? If it is said that at the end of [this] tradition 
[the prophet] said, "But, if God reveals Himself to a thing, it submits 
itself to Him," thereby proving that the eclipse is submission by reason of 
revelation, we answer: 

Page 42: [No Text Extracted]

Page 43:
7 Author's Introduction 
(19) This addition is not soundly transmitted and, hence, the one who 
? transmits it must be judged as conveying what is false. The [correctly] 
related [tradition] is the one we have mentioned. How is this not so? 
For if the transmission [of the addition] were sound, then it would be 
5 easier to interpret it metaphorically rather than to reject matters that 
are conclusively true. For how many an apparent [scriptural] meaning 
has been interpreted metaphorically [on the basis of] rational proofs 
[rejecting their literal sense] that do not attain the degree of clarity [of 
the astronomical demonstrations regarding the eclipse]! The greatest 
10 thing in which the atheists rejoice is for the defender of religion to 
declare that these [astronomical demonstrations] and their like are con­
trary to religion. Thus, the [atheist's] path for refuting religion becomes 
easy if the likes [of the above argument for defending religion] are ren­
dered a condition [for its truth]. 
15 (20) This is because the inquiry [at issue] about the world is whether it 
originated in time or is eternal. Moreover, once its temporal origination 
is established, it makes no difference whether it is a sphere, a simple body, 
an octagon, or a hexagon; [it makes] no difference whether the [highest] 
heavens and what is beneath are thirteen layers, as they say, or lesser or 
20 greater. For the relation of the inquiry into [these matters] to the inquiry 
into divine [matters] is similar to the relation of looking at the number of 
layers of an onion [or] the number of seeds in a pomegranate. What is 
intended here is only [the world's] being God's act, whatever mode it has. 
(21) The third part is one where the dispute pertains to one of the 
25 principles of religion, such as upholding the doctrine of the world's orig­
ination and of the [positive] attributes of the Creator, [or] demonstrat­
ing the resurrection of bodies, all of which [the philosophers] have 
denied. It is in this topic and its likes, not any other, that one must show 
the falsity of their doctrine. 
[A third] introduction 
30 (22) Let it be known that [our] objective is to alert those who think 
well of the philosophers and believe that their ways are free from con­
tradiction by showing the [various] aspects of their incoherence. For 
this reason, I do not enter into [argument] objecting to them, except as 
one who demands and denies, not as one who claims [and] affirms. I will 
35 render murky what they believe in [by showing] conclusively that they 
must hold to various consequences [of their theories]. Thus, I will force 
on them at one time necessary adherence to Muctazilite doctrine, at 

Page 44: [No Text Extracted]

Page 45:
8 Author's Introduction 
another to that of the Karramiyya, at yet another to that of the Waqifiyya.2 
I, however, will not rise to the defense of any one doctrine but will make 
all the sects as one group against them. For the rest of the sects may 
differ from us in matters of detail, whereas these [philosophers] challenge 
5 the [very] principles of religion. Let us [all], then, strive against them. 
For in the face of hardships rancors depart. 
[A fourth] introduction 
(23) One of the tricks these [philosophers] use in enticing [people] 
when confronted with a difficulty in the course of an argument is to say: 
"These metaphysical sciences are obscure and hidden, being the most 
10 difficult of the sciences for intelligent minds. One can only arrive at 
knowing the answer to these difficulties through the introduction of 
mathematics and logic." Thus, whoever imitates them in their unbelief 
when confronted with a difficulty in their doctrine would think well of 
them and say: "No doubt their sciences include a resolution of [this 
15 difficulty]; but it is difficult for me to apprehend it, since I have neither 
mastered logic nor attained mathematics." 
(24) We say: "As regards [the branch of] mathematics which 
consists of the examination of discrete quantity—namely, arithmetic— 
metaphysics has no relation to it. The statement that the understanding 
20 of metaphysics is in need of it is nonsense." It is as if one were to say that 
medicine, grammar, and philology require it, or that arithmetic is in 
need of medicine. As regards the geometrical sciences that consist in the 
investigation of continuous quantity, [the investigation] in sum amounts 
to showing that the [highest] heavens and what is below them to the 
25 center are spherical in shape, to showing the number of their layers, 
to showing the number of the spheres that move in the heavens, and to 
showing the quantity of their [various] motions. Let us concede all this 
to them, either dialectically or out of conviction.3 They do not need to 
set up demonstrations for it. This has no bearing whatever on metaphys-
30 ical investigation. For this is as if someone were to say that the knowl­
edge that this house came to be through the work of a knowing, willing, 

Page 46: [No Text Extracted]

Page 47:
9 Author's Introduction 
living builder, endowed with power, requires that one knows that the 
house is either a hexagon or an octagon and that one knows the number 
of its supporting frames and the number of its bricks, which is raving, its 
falsity obvious; or that one does not know that this onion is temporally 
5 originated unless he knows the number of its layers and does not know 
that this pomegranate is temporally originated unless one knows the 
number of its seeds—[all] of which is abandonment of [rational] dis­
course, discredited by every rational person. 
(25) Yes, when they say that the logical sciences must be mastered, 
10 this is true. But logic is not confined to them. This is the principle which 
in the discipline of theology we name "The Book of Reflection." They 
changed its expression to "logic" to magnify it. We can [also] call it "The 
Book of Argumentation," and we may call it "The Cognitions of the 
Intellects." But when the one seeking to be clever, who is weak, hears the 
15 name "logic," he thinks it an unfamiliar art, unknown to the theologians, 
known only to the philosophers. 
(26) In order to drive away this nonsense and uproot this ruse for 
leading astray, we see [it fit] to set aside discussing "The Cognitions of 
the Intellects" in this book, forsaking in it the terminology of the theolo-
20 gians and lawyers, but will express it in the idiom of the logicians, cast­
ing it in their molds, following their paths expression by expression, and 
will dispute with them in this book in their language—I mean, their 
expressions in logic. We will make it plain that what they set down as a 
condition for the truth of the matter of the syllogism in the part on 
25 demonstrating [their] logic, and what they set forth as a condition for 
its form in the book of the syllogism, and the various things they posited 
in the Isagoge and the Categories which are parts of logic and its prelimi­
naries, [are things] none of which have they been able to fulfill in their 
metaphysical sciences. 
30 (27) We judge it best, however, to introduce "The Cognitions of the 
Intellects" at the end of the book. For it is like an instrument for appre­
hending the intention of the book. But perhaps some who engage in 
theoretical reflection may not need it for comprehending [the book]. 
Hence, we will postpone it to the end so that those who do not need it 
35 can set it aside. Whoever is unable to understand our expressions in 
the individual questions in refuting [the philosophers] should begin by 

Page 48: [No Text Extracted]

Page 49:
10 Author's Introduction 
mastering the book, The Standard for Knowledge,4 which is designated 
"logic" by them. 
(28) Let us now, after [these] introductions, mention the table of 
contents of the problems wherein we show the inconsistency of their doc­
trine in this book. They are twenty problems. 
[Author's table of contents] 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 The first problem: 
The second: 
The third: 
The fourth: 
The fifth: 
The sixth: 
The seventh: 
The eighth: 
The ninth: 
The tenth: 
The eleventh: 
The twelfth: 
The thirteenth: [On] refuting their doctrine of the world's pre-
eternity. 
[On] refuting their doctrine of the world's post-
eternity. 
[On] showing their equivocation in saying that 
God is the maker of the world and that the world 
is of His making. 
On [showing] their inability to prove the exis­
tence of the world's maker. 
On [showing] their inability to prove the impos­
sibility of [the existence] of two gods. 
On refuting their doctrine denying [the divine] 
attributes. 
On refuting their statement that the essence of 
the First is not divisible in terms of genus and 
species. 
On refuting their statement that the First is a 
simple existent without quiddity. 
On showing their inability to demonstrate that 
the First is not a body. 
On showing that upholding a materialist doc­
trine and the denial of the Maker is a necessary 
consequence [of what they hold]. 
On showing their inability to maintain that the 
First knows others. 
On showing their inability to maintain that the 
First knows Himself. 
On refuting their statement that the First does 
not know particulars. 

Page 50: [No Text Extracted]

Page 51:
11 Author's Introduction 
10 The fourteenth: 
The fifteenth: 
The sixteenth: 
The seventeenth: 
The eighteenth: 
The nineteenth: 
The twentieth: 
15 On [refuting their doctrine] that heaven is an 
animal that moves through volition. 
On refuting what they mention regarding the 
purpose that moves heaven. 
On refuting their doctrine that the souls of the 
heavens know all particulars. 
On refuting their doctrine that the disruption of 
the habitual [course of nature] is impossible. 
On [refuting] their statement that the human 
soul is a self-subsistent substance that is neither 
body nor accident. 
On [refuting] their assertion that annihilation is 
impossible for the human soul. 
On refuting their denial of bodily resurrection 
[and] the accompanying bodily pleasures and 
pains in paradise and hell. 
(29) These, then, among their metaphysical and physical sciences, 
are the things in which we wish to mention their contradictions. Regard­
ing mathematical sciences, there is no sense in denying them or dis-
20 agreeing with them. For these reduce in the final analysis to arithmetic 
and geometry. As regards the logical [sciences], these are concerned with 
examining the instrument of thought in intelligible things. There is no 
significant disagreement encountered in these. We will bring about in 
the book The Standard/or Knowledge of its kind5 what is needed for under-
25 standing the content of this book, God willing. 

Page 52: [No Text Extracted]

Page 53:
PART ONE 
[First] Discussion 
On refuting their doctrine of the world's past eternity 
(1) Explicating /their/ doctrine: Philosophers have disagreed among 
themselves regarding the world's past eternity. However, the view of 
their multitudes, both ancient and modern, has settled on upholding its 
past eternity: that it has never ceased to exist with God, exalted be He, to 
5 be an effect of His, to exist along with Him, not being posterior to Him in 
time, in the way the effect coexists along with the cause and light along 
with the sun; that the Creator's priority to [the world] is like the priority of 
the cause to the effect, which is a priority in essence and rank, not in time. 
(2) It is related that Plato said: "The world is generated and origi-
10 nated in time." But, then, some among [the philosophers] have inter­
preted his language as metaphor, refusing [to maintain] that the world's 
temporal origination is a belief of his. 
(3) Toward the end of his life, in the book entitled What Galen Believes 
as Sound Judgment, Galen adopted a noncommitted position on this ques­
ts tion, [stating] that he does not know whether the world is pre-eternal or 
temporally originated, that perhaps he can prove that [the answer] is 
unknowable to him, not because of any shortcoming on his part, but 
because of the inherent difficulty of this to [human] minds. This, how­
ever, appears to be most unusual in their doctrine. Rather, the doctrine 
20 of all of them is that [the world] is pre-eternal and that altogether it is 
basically inconceivable for a temporal being to proceed from the eternal 
without mediation. 
-12-

Page 54: [No Text Extracted]

Page 55:
13 Discussion 1 
(4) Presenting their proofs: If I were to go into a description of what has 
been transmitted of [the philosophers' arguments] in the display of 
proofs and what has been said in objection to them, I would have to ink 
very many pages. But there is no virtue in lengthening matters. Let us, 
5 then, delete from their proofs whatever belongs to the category of the 
arbitrary or of that which is feeble imagining, easily resolved by any 
reflective examiner. Let us [instead] confine ourselves to bringing forth 
those [proofs] that leave an impact on the soul and that are able to 
arouse doubt in the best speculative thinkers. For arousing doubt in the 
10 weak is possible with the most feeble [of arguments]. 
(5) There are three1 proofs of this sort. 
The first [proof] 
[First discussion: The first proof] 
(6) They say, "It is absolutely impossible for a temporal to proceed 
from an eternal." For, if we suppose the Eternal without, for example, 
the world proceeding from Him, then it would not have proceeded 
15 because existence would not have had that which gives [it] preponder­
ance; rather, the world's existence would have been a pure possibility. If 
thereafter it were to come into existence, then a giver of preponderance 
either would have come into existence anew or would not have come into 
existence anew. If no giver of preponderance had come into existence 
20 anew, the world would have then remained in a state of pure possibility 
as it had been before. If [on the other hand] a giver of preponderance 
did come into existence anew, then [the question arises]: "Who origi­
nated this giver of preponderance and why did it originate now and not 
earlier?" The question regarding the giver of preponderance persists. 
25 (7) In brief, if the states of the Eternal are similar, then either noth­
ing at all comes into existence through Him or else it comes into exis­
tence perpetually. As for [an existing divine] state of refraining [to act] 
standing differentiated from [another existing divine] state of commenc­
ing [to act, this] is impossible. 
30 (8) The verifying [of this] consists in saying, "Why was the world not 
created before its creation?" This cannot be ascribed to His inability 
to originate [it earlier], nor to the impossibility of [an earlier] creation. 
For this would lead the Eternal to change from impotence to power and 
the world from impossibility to possibility, both of which are impossible. 

Page 56: [No Text Extracted]

Page 57:
14 Discussion 1 
And it cannot be said that earlier there was no purpose, a purpose there­
after coming into existence anew. Nor can this be attributed to the loss of 
an instrument which was thereafter found. Rather, the closest imagina­
tive thing is to say: "He did not will its existence before this," from which 
5 it follows that one must say: "Its existence occurred because He became 
a wilier of its existence after not having been a wilier," in which case the 
will would have been created. But its creation in Himself is impossible, 
since He is not the receptacle of created things, and its creation not in 
Himself would not make Him a wilier. 
10 (9) But let us leave speculation about the place [of the will's creation]. 
Does not the difficulty persist regarding the source of its2 creation— 
whence did [the source] originate, and why did it come into existence 
now and not earlier? Did it come into existence now [but] not from the 
direction of God? II a temporal event without an originator is allowed, 
15 then let the world be an originated thing, having no maker. Otherwise, 
what difference is there between one originated thing and another? If 
[the world] is originated through God's origination of it, then why was it 
originated now and not earlier? Is this because of a lack of an instrument, 
power, purpose, or nature, such that, once these are replaced by existence, 
20 [the world] came to be originated [now]? But then the same difficulty 
recurs. Or is [its not being created earlier] due to the lack of a will? But 
then the will would require another will to create it and likewise the first 
will [and so on], regressing infinitely.3 
(10) Thus, it is now ascertained through incontrovertible argument 
25 that the proceeding of the temporal from the Eternal without a change 
of state of affairs in the Eternal by way of power, instrument, time, pur­
pose, or nature is impossible. To project a change of state [in the Eternal] 
is impossible because the argument regarding that change that comes 
about is similar to the argument regarding any other [change]. All this is 
30 impossible. [Hence,] as long as the world exists and its origination in 
time is impossible, its past eternity stands necessarily established. 
(11) This, then, is the most imaginative of their proofs. In general, 
their discussion in the rest of the metaphysical questions is weaker than 
their discussion in this, since here they are able to [indulge in] various 
35 types of imaginings they are unable to pursue in other [questions]. For 
this reason we have given priority to this question, presenting first the 
strongest of their proofs. 
(12) The objection [to their proof] is in two respects. 

Page 58: [No Text Extracted]

Page 59:
15 Discussion 1 
[(1) The first objection] 
(13) One of these is to say: With what [argument] would you deny 
one who says, "The world was temporally created by an eternal will that 
decreed its existence at the time in which it came to be; that [the pre­
ceding] nonexistence continued to the point at which [the world] began; 
5 that existence prior to this was not willed and for this reason did not 
occur; that at the time in which [the world] was created it was willed 
by the eternal will to be created at that time and for this reason it was 
created then"? What is there to disallow such a belief and what would 
render it impossible? 
10 (14) To this [the opponent may] say:4 
(15) This is impossible; its impossibility is very clear. For the tempo­
ral occurrence is necessitated and caused. And just as it is impossible for 
an event to exist without a cause and that which necessitates [it], it is 
impossible for that which necessitates [a thing] to exist with all the condi-
15 tions of its being necessitating, [all the conditions] of its principles and 
causes fulfilled, such that nothing at all remains awaited, and then for 
the necessitated [effect] to be delayed. On the contrary, the existence 
of the necessitated [effect], when the conditions of the necessitating 
[cause] are fulfilled, is necessary and its delay impossible in accordance 
20 with the impossibility of the existence of the necessitated effect without 
the necessitating cause. 
(Hi) Before the world's existence, the wilier existed, the will existed, and 
its relation to what is willed existed. No wilier came into existence anew, 
no will came into existence anew, and no relation that did not exist came 
25 to exist for (he will anew. For all this is change. How, then, did the object of 
will come into existence anew, and what prevented its coming into existence 
anew earlier? [All this, moreover, would have taken place] when the state of 
renewal did not differ from the previous state in anything whatsoever— 
in any state of affairs, [in] any condition, or [in] any relation. Indeed, the 
30 state of affairs would have remained identical to what it was [before], the 
object of the will not having come into existence, and would remain 
thereafter as it was before when [lo and behold] the object of the will would 
come into existence! This is nothing but the ultimate in impossibility. 
(17) Nor is the impossibility of this [restricted] to what necessitates 
35 and is necessitated in [the realm of] the necessary [and] the essential, 
but [it] is found in the customary and conventional. For if a man utters 
the [legal pronouncement] divorcing his wife and the separation does not 
occur immediately, it is inconceivable for it to occur thereafter. For he 

Page 60: [No Text Extracted]

Page 61:
16 Discussion 1 
has made the utterance a cause of the judgment in terms of convention 
and [legal] idiom. Thus, the delay of the effect is inconceivable unless he 
ties the divorce with the coming of the next day or with the entry to the 
house, in which case [the divorce] does not take place immediately but 
J will take place when the morrow comes about or with the entry into the 
house. For he has made [the utterance] a cause [for the divorce] by relat­
ing it to an expected thing; and since this expected thing—namely, the 
coming of the morrow and the entry [to the house]—is not now present, 
the realization of the necessitated thing remains pending the occurrence 
10 of what is not now at hand. Once the necessitated occurs, then something 
would have necessarily come anew—namely, the entry into the house and 
the coming of the morrow—so that if the man wants to delay the neces­
sitated [divorce] beyond [the legal] pronouncement that is not made con­
ditional on an occurrence [still] unrealized, this would be inconceivable, 
15 even though he is the one who sets down the convention and has the 
choice in explicating its details. If, then, we are unable by our own desire 
to posit [such a delay] and cannot conceive it, how are we to conceive it in 
what is necessitated [in the realm] of essential, rational, necessary things? 
(18) As regards habitual things, what is brought about through our 
20 intentional act is not delayed after the intent when the intent exists 
except by an impediment. Once the intent and ability are realized, [all] 
obstacle's being removed, the delay of what is intended is not rationally 
intelligible. This is only conceivable in the case of resolve, because 
resolve is not sufficient for the existence of the act. Indeed, the resolve to 
25 write does not produce writing unless an intent is renewed, this being a 
renewed upsurge of motive within the human at the time of the act. 
(19) If the eternal will belongs to the same category as that of our 
intention to act, then, unless there is an impediment, neither the delay 
of what is intended nor the [temporal] priority of the intent are conceiv-
30 able. Hence, an intent today that leads to an arising on the morrow is 
incomprehensible except [if one thinks that this takes place] by way of 
resolve. And if the eternal will is of the same category as our resolve, this 
would not be sufficient for the object of the resolution to occur. Rather, 
there would be the inescapable need for a renewed intentional upsurge 
35 at the time of the [act of] bringing [something] into existence. But this 
entails upholding change in the Eternal. Moreover, the very same diffi­
culty persists in [that the question still] arises concerning this upsurge, 
intention, will, or whatever you wish to call it: why did it occur now and 
not earlier? [The consequence is that] there would be either a temporal 
40 occurrence without a cause or an infinite regress [of causes]. 

Page 62: [No Text Extracted]

Page 63:
17 Discussion 1 
(20) The sum total of this is that the necessitating [cause would] 
exist with all its conditions fulfilled, there remaining no expected thing; 
and yet, with [all] this, the necessitated [effect] would have been delayed 
and would not have existed in a period whose beginning the imagination 
5 cannot reach—indeed, [a period where] thousands of years [taken away 
from it] would not diminish it by a thing—and then suddenly the neces­
sitated [effect] would turn [into an existent] without anything having 
come anew or any [new] condition having been realized. And this is in 
itself impossible. 
10 (21) The answer is to say: 
(22) Do you know the impossibility of an eternal will related to the 
temporal creation of something, whatever that thing is, through the 
necessity of reason or its theoretical reflection?5 According to your lan­
guage in logic, is the connection between the two terms [namely, "the 
15 denial will" and "temporal creation"] known to you with or without a 
middle term? II you claim a middle term, which is the reflective theoreti­
cal method, then you must show it. [But this you have not shown.] If [on 
the other hand] you claim to know this [impossibility] through the neces­
sity of reason, how is it, then, that those who oppose you do not share this 
20 knowledge, when the party believing in the world's temporal creation by an 
eternal will is [such] that no one land [can] contain it and [that its] num­
ber is beyond enumeration? And these certainly do not stubbornly defy 
reason while possessing the knowledge [which you claim is attainable 
through the necessity of reason]. Hence, it is incumbent on you to set up a 
25 demonstrative proof according to the condition of logic that would show 
the impossibility of this. For, in all of what you have stated, there is nothing 
but [an expression of] unlikelihood and the drawing of an analogy with our 
resolve and will, this being false, since the eternal will does not resemble 
temporal [human] intentions. As regards the sheer deeming of some-
30 thing as unlikely, without demonstrative proof, [this] is not sufficient. 
(23) If it is said, "We know through the necessity of reason that a 
necessitating [cause] with all its conditions fulfilled is inconceivable 
without a necessitated [effect] and that the one who allows this is stub­
bornly defying the necessity of reason," we say: 
35 (24) What difference is there between you and your opponents when 
they say to you, "We know by necessity the impossibility of someone's 
statement that one essence knows all the universals without this neces­
sitating multiplicity [in the essence], without [this] knowledge's being [an 
attribute] additional to the essence,6 and without knowledge's becoming 

Page 64: [No Text Extracted]

Page 65:
18 Discussion 1 
multiple with the multiplicity of the object of knowledge?"—this being 
your doctrine regarding God, which, in relation to us and our own sci­
ences, is the ultimate in impossibility. But then you say, "Eternal knowl­
edge is not to be compared with created [knowledge]." A group among 
5 you, however, becoming aware of the impossibility [we indicated], said, 
"God knows only Himself, so that He is the intellectual apprehender, the 
intellect and the intelligible, all these being one and the same." Now, if 
one were to say [to this], "The union of the intellect, the intellectual 
apprehender, and the intelligible is known necessarily to be impossible, 
10 since the supposition of a Maker of the world who does not know His 
handiwork is necessarily impossible; and, if the Eternal—may He be 
greatly exalted over what they and all the deviants [from the truth] 
say—knows only Himself, He would not know His handiwork at all," 
[what would you say?] 
15 (25) Indeed, we would not be going beyond the necessary implica­
tions of this question when we say: 
(26) With what [argument] would you deny your opponents inas­
much as they have said [the following]? "The world's past eternity is 
impossible because it leads to affirming circular movements of the 
20 heavenly sphere whose number is infinite and whose individual units 
are innumerable, even though they (divide into] a sixth, a fourth, a half 
[and so on]. For the sphere of the sun rotates in one year, whereas 
Saturn's rotates in thirty, so that the rotations of Saturn are a third of 
a tenth of those of the sun. [Again,] the rotations of Jupiter are a half 
25 of a sixth of the rotations of the sun; for it rotates once in every 
twelve years. [Now,] just as the number of the rotations of Saturn is 
infinite, the number of the solar rotations, although a third of a tenth 
[of the latter], is [also] infinite. Indeed, the rotations of the sphere of 
the fixed stars, which rotates [once in] every thirty-six thousand years, 
30 are infinite, just as the sun's movement from east to west, taking place 
in a day and a night, is [likewise] infinite." If one then were to say, 
"This is one of the things whose impossibility is known by the necessity 
[of reason]," how would your [position] differ from his statement? 
Indeed, [how are you to answer] if one were to say, "Is the number of the 
35 rotations even or odd, both even and odd, or neither even nor odd?" 
Should you answer either that the number is both even and odd or that 
it is neither even nor odd, then [again] this would be something whose 
falsity is known through [rational] necessity. If you were to say that 
the number is even, and the even becomes odd by [the addition of] one, 
40 then how can the infinite be in need of one? If, on the other hand, you 

Page 66: [No Text Extracted]

Page 67:
19 Discussion 1 
answer that it is odd, then how would the infinite be in need of that one 
which would render it even? You are then necessarily forced to uphold 
the statement that it is neither even nor odd. 
(27) If it is said, "It is only the finite that is described as either even 
5 or odd, but the infinite is not so described," we say: 
(28) An aggregate composed of units having, as has been mentioned, 
a sixth and tenth, which is yet not described as either even or odd, 
is something whose falsity is known by necessity without theoretical 
reflection. With what [argument] can you disentangle yourselves from 
10 this? If it is then said, "The place of error lies in your statement that the 
heavenly movements consist of an aggregate composed of units; for these 
rotations are nonexistent, the past having ceased to exist, the future not 
yet existing; the 'aggregate' refers to existents that are present, but here 
I here is no [such] existent," we say: 
15 (29) Number divides into the even and the odd, and it is impossible 
for it to lie outside this [division], regardless of whether or not what is 
enumerated exists and endures or ceases to exist. For, if we suppose a 
number of horses, a necessary consequence of this is that [their number] 
is either even or odd, regardless of whether or not we reckon them exist-
20 ing or nonexisting. Should they cease to exist after existing, the proposi­
tion does not change. But we [furthermore] say to them: 
(30) According to your own principles, it is not impossible that there 
should be existents, present here and now, which are individual entities 
varying in descriptions and which are infinite. These are the souls of 
25 humans that are separated from bodies after death. These, then, are exis­
tents that are not characterized as even and odd. With what [argument] 
would you deny [the statement] of someone who says: "The falsity of this 
is known through the necessity [of reason] in the same way you claim that 
the falsity of the connectedness of the eternal will with the act of tempo-
30 ral creation is known through the necessity [of reason]"? This view of 
souls is the one chosen by Avicenna, and perhaps it is Aristotle's doctrine. 
(31) If it is said, "The truth is Plato's view—namely, that the soul 
is pre-eternal and one, that it is divided only in bodies, and that once it 
separates from them it returns to its origin and unites," we say: 

Page 68: [No Text Extracted]

Page 69:
20 Discussion 1 
(32) This is worse, more repugnant, and more worthy to uphold as 
contrary to rational necessity. For we say: "Is the soul of Zayd identical 
with the soul of cAmr, or is it another?" If [it is stated that] it is identical, 
this would be necessarily false. For each individual is aware of his self and 
5 knows that he is not the self of another. [Moreover,] if identical, then 
both would be equal [in having the same] cognitions which are essential 
attributes of souls and which are included with the soul in every relation. 
If [on the other hand] you say that it is another, being individuated 
through attachments to bodies, we say: "The individuation of the one 
10 that has no magnitude in terms of size and quantitative measure is 
[known] by the necessity of reason to be impossible. How, then, will the 
one become two—nay, a thousand—then revert to becoming one? This 
is only intelligible in things that have magnitude and quantity, like the 
water of the sea that divides through streams and rivers and then returns 
15 to the sea. But how can that which is not quantitative be divided?" 
(33) What is intended by all this is to show that they have not ren­
dered their opponents unable to uphold belief in the connectedness of 
the eternal will with the act of temporal creation except by invoking 
[rational] necessity and that they are unable to disengage from those 
20 who [in turn] invoke [rational] necessity against them in those matters 
opposed to their own belief. From this [they have] no escape. 
(34) To this it may be said: "This turns against you, in that before 
the world's creation God was able to create by a year or by years, there 
being no limit to His power. It is as though He waited, not creating, then 
25 created. What, then, of the duration of His refraining from creating; is 
it finite or infinite? If you say that it is finite, then the existence of God 
would be of a finite beginning. If you say that it is infinite, then a period 
wherein there are infinite possibilities would have elapsed." 
(35) [To this] we say: 
30 (36) According to us, duration and time are both created. We will be 
clarifying the true answer to this when we dissociate ourselves from their 
second proof. 

Page 70: [No Text Extracted]

Page 71:
21 Discussion 1 
(37) [The philosophers, however, may] say: 
(38) With what [argument] would you deny one who relinquishes the 
appeal to the necessity [of reason] and proves [the impossibility of the 
connectedness of the eternal will with the act of temporal creation] in 
5 another way—namely, that the times are equal with respect to the pos­
sibility of the will's attachment to any of them? What, then, would have 
differentiated a specific time from what precedes and succeeds it when it 
is not impossible for [any of] the prior and posterior [times] to have been 
willed [as the beginning of creation]?7 Indeed, in the case of whiteness 
10 and blackness, motion and rest, you [theologians] say: "Whiteness is 
created by the eternal will when the receptacle is as receptive of black­
ness as it is of whiteness." Why, then, did the eternal will attach itself to 
whiteness [and] not blackness, and what differentiated one of the two 
possibles from the other with respect to the will's attachment to it? We 
15 know by [rational] necessity that a thing is not distinguished from what 
is similar to it except through that which specifies. If this were allowed, 
then it would be permissible for the world, whose existence and nonexis­
tence are equally possible, to originate in time; and the side of existence, 
similar in terms of possibility to the side of nonexistence, would thus be 
20 specified with existence without there being that which would specify 
[it]. If you say that the will specifies [it], then the question arises about 
the will's act of specifying and why it specified [one possible rather than 
another]. If you say that the "why" is not said of the eternal, then let the 
world be eternal and let there be no demand for its maker and cause— 
25 for "why" is not said of the eternal. 
(39) For, if the eternal's specific relation to one of the two [equally] 
possible [existents] through [sheer] coincidence is allowed, then the 
uttermost unlikely thing would be to say that the world is specified with 
specific shapes when it is [equally] possible for it to have other shapes 
30 instead; whereupon one would then [also] say that this occurred in a 
manner coincidentally, in the same way that you [theologians] have said 
that the will has specifically related to one time rather than another and 
one shape rather than another by coincidence. If you then say that this 
question is superfluous because it can refer to anything the Creator wills 
35 and reverts to anything He decrees, we say, "No! On the contrary, this 
question is necessary because it recurs at all times and attaches to those 
who oppose us with every supposition [they make]." 
(40) [To this] we say: 

Page 72: [No Text Extracted]

Page 73:
22 Discussion 1 
(41) The world came to existence whence it did, having the descrip­
tion with which it came to exist, and in the place in which it came to 
exist, through will, will being an attribute whose function is to differen­
tiate a thing from its similar. If this were not its function, then power 
5 would be sufficient.8 But since the relation of power to two contraries is 
the same and there was an inescapable need for a specifying [agent] that 
would specify one thing from its similar, it was said: "The Eternal has, 
beyond power, an attribute that has as its function the specifying of one 
thing from its similar." Hence, someone's statement, "Why did the will 
10 specifically relate to one of the two similars?" is akin to the statement, 
"Why does knowledge entail as a requirement the encompassing of the 
object of knowledge as it is?" For [to the latter] one would reply, "This 
is because 'knowledge' stands as an expression for an attribute that 
has this as a function." Similarly, "Will stands as an expression for an 
15 attribute whose function—nay, its essence—is to differentiate a thing 
from its similar." 
(42) [To this the philosophers might then] say: 
(43) Affirming an attribute whose function is to differentiate a thing 
from its similar is incomprehensible—indeed, contradictory. For to be 
20 similar means to be indiscernible, and to be discernible means that it 
is dissimilar. One should not think that two [instances of] blackness 
in two places are similar in every respect. For one is in one place, the 
other in another. And this necessitates a differentiation. Nor are two 
[instances] of blackness in the same place at two different times 
25 absolutely similar. For one differed from the other in terms of time— 
how could it be similar to it in every respect? If we say that the two 
| instances] of blackness are [two] things similar to each other, we mean 
by it [similar] in blackness related [to the two instances] in a special, not 
in an unrestricted, sense. Otherwise, if place and time are unified and 
30 no otherness remains, then neither the two [instances] of blackness nor 
duality itself is conceivable. This is shown to be true by [the fact] that the 
expression "will" [as applied to God] is a borrowing from our "will." It is 
inconceivable of us that we would differentiate through will one thing 
from its similar. Indeed, if in front of a thirsty person there are 
35 two glasses of water that are similar in every respect in relation to his 
purpose [of wanting to drink], it would be impossible for him to take 
either. Rather, he would take that which he would deem better, lighter, 

Page 74: [No Text Extracted]

Page 75:
23 Discussion 1 
closer to his right side—if his habit was to move the right hand—or 
some such cause, whether hidden or manifest. Otherwise, differentiating 
something from its like is in no circumstance conceivable. 
(44) The objection [to this argument of the philosophers] is in two ways: 
[a] 
5 (45) The first is regarding your statement that this is inconceivable: 
do you know this through [rational] necessity or through theoretical 
reflection? It is impossible [for you] to appeal to either of these. Moreover, 
your using our will as an example constitutes a false analogy that parallels 
the analogy [between human and divine] knowledge. God's knowledge 
10 differs from human knowledge in matters we have [already] established. 
Why, then, should the difference between [the divine and the human] in 
the case of the will be unlikely? Rather, this is akin to someone's statement, 
"An essence existing neither outside nor inside the world, being neither 
connected nor disconnected with it, is inconceivable because we cannot 
15 conceive it on our own terms," to which it would then be said, "This is the 
work of your estimative faculty9—rational proof has led rational people 
to believe this." With what [argument ] would you then deny one who says 
(hat rational proof has led to the establishing of an attribute belonging to 
God, exalted be He, whose function is to differentiate a thing from its 
20 similar? II'I he term "will" does not correspond [to this attribute], then let 
it be given another name; for there need be no dispute about names, and 
we ourselves have only used it because the religious law permits [its use]. 
Otherwise, "will" is conventionally used in language to designate that which 
has an objective [fulfilling a need], and there is never [such] an objective in 
25 the case of God. What is intended is the meaning, not the utterance. 
(46) Even so, in our [own human] case, we do not concede that (the 
choice between similar things] is inconceivable. For we will suppose that 
there are two equal dates in front of someone gazing longingly at them, 
unable, however, to take both together. He will inevitably take one of 
30 them through an attribute whose function is to render a thing specific, 
[differentiating it] from its like. All the specifying things you have men­
tioned by way of goodness, proximity, and ease of taking we can suppose 
to be absent, the possibility of taking [one of the two] yet remaining. 
You are, hence, left between two alternatives. You could either say that 
35 equality in relation to the individual's purpose is utterly inconceivable, 
which is sheer foolishness, the supposition [of this equality] being 
possible;10 or else, that if the equality is supposed, the man yearning [for 
the dates] would ever remain undecided, looking at them but taking 

Page 76: [No Text Extracted]

Page 77:
24 Discussion 1 
neither through pure will and choice that [according to you] are dissoci­
ated from the objective [of taking a specific one]. This also is impossible, 
its falsity known by [rational] necessity. It is, hence, inescapable for any­
one engaged in theoretical reflection on the true nature of the voluntary 
5 act, whether in the realm of the observable or the unseen, but to affirm 
the existence of an attribute whose function is to render one thing spe­
cifically distinct from its similar. 
(47) The second way of objecting is for us to say: 
[bj 
(48) You in your own doctrine have not been able to dispense with 
10 the rendering one of two similars specifically [distinct], for [you hold] 
the world to have come into being through its necessitating cause, hav­
ing specific configurations similar to their opposites. Why has it been 
specified with [certain) aspects [and not others], when the impossibility 
of differentiating one thing from its similar [as you uphold] does not 
15 dill'er, [whether] in the |voluntary] act or in that which follows by nature 
or by necessity? 
(49) [To this you may] say: 
(50) The universal order of the world can only be in the way it has 
come to be. If the world were smaller or larger than it is at present, then 
20 this order would not be complete. The same holds when speaking of the 
number of these spheres and stars. You claim that the large differs from 
the small and the numerous from the few in terms of what is required of 
them. These, then, are not similar, but different, except that the human 
faculty falls short of apprehending the modes of wisdom pertaining to 
25 their quantities and details. It apprehends the wisdom only in some of 
them—as, for example, the wisdom in the inclination of the sphere of the 
zodiac away from the celestial equator, and the wisdom in [assigning] 
the apogee and the spherical elliptical orbit. In most, the secret is not 
apprehended, although their differences are known. It is not unlikely 
30 that a thing is differentiated from its opposite by reason of its relation to 
the established order. In the case of times, however, they are absolutely 
similar in relation to possibility and the [established] order. It is impos­
sible to claim that, if [the world] had been created later or earlier by one 
moment, the order would be inconceivable. For the similarity of [temporal] 
35 states is known by [rational] necessity. 
(51) [To this we] say: 

Page 78: [No Text Extracted]

Page 79:
25 Discussion 1 
(52) Even though we are able to use a similar argument against 
you in terms of [temporal] states, since there are those who say that God 
created the world at the time which was best for its creation, we will not 
restrict ourselves to this comparable [argument]. Rather, we will force 
5 [on you], in terms of your own principles, [the admission of] rendering 
specific [one similar as distinct from another] in two instances where 
it is not possible to suppose a difference [between their similars]. One 
is the difference of direction of [the world's] motion; the other is the 
assignment of the position of the pole in the ecliptic movement. 
10 (53) Regarding the pole, its explanation is [as follows]: Heaven is a 
sphere rotating around two poles as though both are stationary. [Now,] 
the heavenly sphere is of similar parts. For it is simple—particularly the 
highest heaven, the ninth, for it has no stars at all. These two spheres 
(the ninth and the rest| rotate around two poles, northern and southern. 
15 Thus, we say, "There are no two opposite points among the points that, 
according [to the philosophers], are infinite but could be conceived as 
being tlit; pole. Why is it, then, that tin; northern and southern points 
have been assigned to be the polos and to be stationary? And why does 
not the ecliptic line [shiftj, moving with [it] the two points so that the 
20 poles would revert to the two opposite points of the ecliptic? If, then, 
there is wisdom in the extent of the largeness of heaven and its shape, 
what differentiated the place of the pole from another [place], singling it 
out to be the pole from the rest of the parts and points, when all the 
points are similar and all parts of the sphere are equal?" There is no way 
25 out of this [for them]. 
(54) [To this the philosophers may] say: 
(55) Perhaps the position where the point of the pole lies differs from 
other [positions| by a peculiarity that renders it suitable to be a place for 
the pole so as to be rendered stationary. It is, thus, as though it would not 
30 leave its "place," "space," "position," or whatever name is given it, while 
the rest of the positions on the [surface] of the [outermost] heaven in 
relation to the earth and [the rest of the] spheres change through rota­
tion, the pole remaining stationary in its position. Perhaps, then, that 
position [for the pole] has precedence over others for being stationary. 

Page 80: [No Text Extracted]

Page 81:
26 Discussion 1 
(56) [To this] we say: 
(57) In this there is a declared admission of a natural inequality 
of the parts of the first sphere—that it is not of similar parts. This 
is contrary to your principle, since one [of the principles] on which you 
J base your proof for the necessity for the heavens to be spherical in shape 
is that it is a simple nature, similar [in its parts], having no inequality. 
The simplest of the figures is the sphere. For being quadrangular and 
hexagonal and so on entails the protrusion of angles and their inequality, 
which can only be due to something additional to the simple nature. 
10 Moreover, even though this [answer you have given] is contrary to your 
doctrine, [the original] consequence forced on you is not removed by it. 
For the question regarding that peculiarity remains: are the rest of the 
parts receptive of this peculiarity or not? If they say, "Yes," then why 
did 11 his] peculiarity attach specifically to one of the similars and not 
15 the rest? If they say, "This [peculiarity] does not belong to any but that 
position, the rest of the parts not being receptive of it," we say: "The rest 
of the parts, inasmuch as they constitute a body receptive of forms, are 
necessarily similar. The place is not deserving of that peculiarity by sim­
ply being a body or by simply being a heaven. For this intended meaning 
20 is shared by all parts of heaven. It is thus the inescapable conclusion 
that assigning [a particular place] with a specific characteristic is either 
arbitrary or else [realized] IIrrough an attribute whose very function is to 
render one thing [more] specific than its exact similar. For, just as it is 
legitimate for them to say that the [temporal] states are equal in their 
25 receptivity of the world's occurrence, it is legitimate for their opponents 
to say that the parts of heaven are equal in terms of the receptivity of 
the idea due to which precedence is given to the fixity of [one] position 
[for the pole] as against its replacement." From this there is no escape. 
(58) The second consequence forced on them is [this question]: 
30 "What is the cause for assigning the direction of the motions of the 
spheres—some from east to west, some in the opposite direction—[this] 
despite the equivalence in direction when the equivalence in direction is 
similar to the equivalence in times, there being no difference?" 
(59) [To this they] may say: 

Page 82: [No Text Extracted]

Page 83:
27 Discussion 1 
(60) If all the whole [of the spheres] were to rotate in one direction, 
then their positions would not differ and the relationships between the 
stars in terms of being trine or sextine, having conjunction, and the like 
would not come about. The whole would then be in one state, without 
5 any differentiation at all, when [in fact] these [diverse] relationships are 
the principles of temporal events in the world. 
(61) We say: 
(62) We are not forced [into the position of affirming] the nonexis­
tence of difference in the direction of the movement, but, on the con-
10 trary, say: "The highest sphere moves from east to west and what is 
beneath it in the opposite direction. Everything that can be achieved 
through this is achievable through its opposite—namely, in that the 
higher would move from west to east and that which is beneath it in the 
opposite direction, thereby differences taking place. [Now,] the direc-
15 lions of the motion after being circular and opposite are equivalent. 
Why, then, did one direction differ from another similar direction?" 
(63) Should they say, "The directions are opposite and contrary; how, 
then, are they similar?" we would say: 
(64) This is similar to someone's saying that priority and posteriority 
20 in terms of the world's [coming into] existence are contraries; how can 
one then claim their similarity? They claim, however, that one knows the 
similarity ol times in relation to the possibility of existence and every 
beneficial end in existence whose conception is supposed. [But, then,] 
one can similarly [claim] that one knows the equivalence in space, posi-
25 tion, and direction with respect to the receptivity of motion and every 
beneficial end related to it. If, then, they are allowed the claim of 
difference despite this similarity, their opponents are also allowed the 
claim of difference in times and configurations. 
[(2) The second objection] 
(65) The second objection against the basis of their proof is to say: 
30 (66) You deem the occurrence of a temporal event through an eternal 
improbable when it is incumbent on you to acknowledge it. For in the 
world there are temporal events which have causes. If temporal events 
were to depend on [other] temporal events ad infinitum, this would 
be impossible—this is not the belief of a rational person. If this were 

Page 84: [No Text Extracted]

Page 85:
28 Discussion 1 
possible, you would then have had no need to acknowledge [the existence 
of] the Maker and affirm a Necessary Existent who is the ground of [all] 
the possible [existents]. If, then, events have a limit with which their 
chain terminates, this limit would be the Eternal. It is, hence, inescapable 
5 in terms of their [own] principle to allow the proceeding of a temporal 
from an eternal. 
(67) [It may be] said: 
(68) We do not deem improbable the proceeding of a temporal 
event, whichever event this is, from an eternal; rather, we deem improb-
10 able the proceeding from an eternal of an event which is a first event. 
For the state of coming into existence does not differ from what precedes 
it with respect to the preponderance of the direction of existence, 
whether in terms of the presence of a temporal moment, an organ, a con­
dition, a nature, a purpose, or any cause. But if the event is not the first 
15 event, then it is possible [for the temporal event] to proceed from [an 
eternal] with the temporal occurrence of some other thing, such as a 
preparedness in the receptacle, the presence of a suitable time, or some­
thing of this sort. 
(69) [To this] we say: 
20 (70) The question regarding the occurrence of the preparedness, the 
presence of the [suitable] time, and whatever comes into being anew, 
remains. Either [these occurrences] regress ad infinitum or terminate 
with an eternal from which a first temporal event comes about. 
(71) [To this, however, it may be] said: 
25 (72) None of the materials receptive of forms, accidents, and quali­
ties are temporally created. The qualities that come into being in time 
are the movements of the spheres—I mean, the circular motion—and 
whatever descriptions relating to it by way of triadic, hexagonal, and 
quadratic configurations that come into existence anew. These consist of 
30 the relation of some parts of heaven and the stars to each other and some 
to the earth—as with [the occurrences] that take place byway of astral 
ascent, appearance [in the firmament], the decline from the highest point 
and greatest distance from the earth by the star's being at its apogee, 
and its proximity by being at its perigee and inclining away from some 

Page 86: [No Text Extracted]

Page 87:
29 Discussion 1 
climes by being in the north or in the south. This relation is by necessity 
a concomitant to the circular motion; it is, hence, necessitated by the cir­
cular motion. As regards the events contained in the sublunar sphere— 
namely, the elements with respect to what occurs in them by way of 
5 generation and corruption, combination and separation, and transfor­
mation from one description to another—all these are events dependent 
on each other in a lengthy, detailed [way]. In the end, the principles of 
their causes terminate with the circular heavenly movement, the rela­
tions of the stars to each other, and their relation to the earth. 
10 (73) The outcome of all this is that the perpetual, eternal circular 
motion is the basis of all temporal events. That which imparts the circu­
lar motion of the heavens is the souls of the heavens. For these are alive, 
having the same relation to the spheres as our souls to our bodies. The 
[heavens'] souls are eternal. No wonder, then, that the heavenly motion 
15 necessitated by the souls is also eternal. And, since the states of the souls 
are similar, due to their being eternal, the states of the movements 
become similar; that is, they circulate eternally. 
(71) It is, hence, inconceivable for a temporal event to proceed from 
an eternal except through the mediation of an eternal circular move­
nt? merit that in one respect resembles the Eternal, for He is everlasting; 
and (hat in another respect resembles the temporal: for each of its parts 
that are supposed conies into existence alter not being. Hence, inas­
much as [the circular movement] is temporal in terms of its parts and 
relationships, it is the principle of temporal events; and, inasmuch as it 
25 is eternal [in terms] of similar states, it proceeds from an eternal soul. 
Thus, if there are events in the world, there must then be a circular 
motion. But in the world there are events. Hence, the eternal circular 
motion is established." 
(75) | To this we] say: 
30 (76) This lengthy elaboration does you no good. For is the circular 
motion, which is the foundation [of all temporal events], temporally orig­
inated or eternal? If eternal, how does [this foundation] become a prin­
ciple for the first temporal event? If temporal, it would require another 

Page 88: [No Text Extracted]

Page 89:
30 Discussion 1 
temporal event, [and so on,] regressing [ad infinitum]. [Regarding] your 
statement that in one respect it resembles the eternal and in one respect 
the temporal, being constant and renewed—that is, it is constant in 
being renewed, its constancy ever renewed—we say: "Is it the principle 
5 of temporal events inasmuch as it is permanent or inasmuch as it is 
being renewed? If inasmuch as it is permanent, how is it, then, that there 
would proceed from something permanent whose states are similar 
something that occurs at [certain] times but not others? If inasmuch as 
it is renewed, what is the cause of [the] renewal in itself? It would then 
10 require another cause, and [this] would regress [infinitely]." This, then, 
is the final [word] in confirming the necessary [absurd] consequences [of 
their position]. 
(77) They have, however, in the [endeavor to] escape this necessary 
consequence, [forced on them] a kind of ruse which we will bring forth 
15 [not here, but] in some of the [forthcoming] discussions, lest the dis­
course in this discussion become prolonged through the branching of the 
diverse, diverting ways of speech. We shall, however, show that the circu­
lar motion is not suitable to be the principle of temporal events and that 
all events are inventions of God by [a first] initiation,12 refuting what 
20 they say regarding heaven being an animal that by choice undergoes a 
motion [caused] by the soul similar to our movements. 
A second proof they have on this question 
[First discussion: Second proof] 
(78) They claim that whoever asserts that the world is posterior to 
God and God prior to it can mean by it [only one of two things]: '3 
(79) [He can mean] that He is prior in essence, not in time, in the way 
25 that one is prior to two (which is [a priority] by nature, although it can 
temporally coexist with it); and like the priority of cause to effect, as with 
the priority of a person's movement to the movement of [his] shadow 
that follows him, the hand's movement and the movement of the ring, 
and the hand's movement in the water and the movement of the water— 
30 for all these are simultaneous, some being a cause, some an effect. For 

Page 90: [No Text Extracted]

Page 91:
31 Discussion I 
it is said, "The shadow moved because of the person's movement, and the 
water moved because of the hand's movement in the water," and it is not 
said, "The person moved because of the movement of his shadow, and 
the hand moved because of the water's movement," even though [each of 
5 the pair of movements is] simultaneous. If this, then, is meant by the 
Creator's priority to the world, it follows necessarily that both are either 
temporally finite or eternal, it being impossible for one to be eternal and 
; the other temporally finite. 
(80) If [on the other hand] it is meant that the Creator is prior to 
10 the world and time—not essentially, but in time—then, before the exis­
tence of the world and time, a time would have existed in which the world 
did not exist, since nonexistence precedes existence; and God would 
have preceded the world by a very lengthy duration, limited in the direc­
tion of its ending but having no limit in the direction of its beginning. 
15 Thus, before the existence of time, infinite time would have existed, and 
this is contradictory; for this reason the affirmation of the finitude of 
time is impossible. If, then, time, which is the expression of the measure 
of motion, is necessarily pre-eternal, motion is necessarily pre-eternal, 
and that which is in motion and through whose duration time endures is 
20 necessarily pre-eternal. 
(81) The objection [to this] is to say: 
(82) Time is originated and created, and before it there was no time 
at all. We mean by our statement that God is prior to the world and time: 
that He was and there was no world, and that then He was and with Him 
25 was the world. The meaning of our statement, "He was and there was no 
world," is only [the affirmation of] the existence of the Creator's essence 
and nonexistence of the world's essence. And the meaning of our state­
ment, "He was and with Him was the world," is only [the affirmation 
of] the existence of two essences. Thus, by priority we mean only the 
30 appropriation of existence to Himself alone, the world being like an indi­
vidual. If, for example, we said, "God was and there was no Jesus, and 
then He was and Jesus with Him," the utterance would not entail any­
thing other than the existence of an essence and the nonexistence of 
an essence, then the existence of two essences. From this, the supposi-
35 tion of a third thing is not necessary, even though the estimative faculty 
does not refrain from supposing a third thing. But one must not heed the 
errors of estimative thoughts. 

Page 92: [No Text Extracted]

Page 93:
32 Discussion 1 
(83) [In response to this the philosophers may] say: 
(84) There is to our saying, "God was and there was no world," 
a third meaning other than the existence of an essence and the non­
existence of an essence, proved [by the fact that,] if we suppose the 
nonexistence of the world in the future, then the existence of an essence 
and the nonexistence of [another] essence would have been realized— 
where, however, it would then be incorrect to say, "God was and the 
world was not." On the contrary, the correct thing would then be to say, 
"God will be and the world will not be"; whereas we would say about the 
past, "God was and there was no world." Between our saying "was" and 
"will be" there is a difference, since neither [expression] is a substitute 
for the other. Let us, then, examine wherein the difference lies. There is 
no doubt that they do not differ in terms of the existence of the essence 
and the nonexistence of the world, but in a third thing. For if we say 
regarding the future nonexistence of the world, "God was and there was 
no world," it would be said to us, "This is an error." For "was" is only said 
about what has passed. This indicates that underlying the expression 
"was" is a third meaning—namely, the past. But the past in itself is time 
and through another is motion; for [the latter] passes with the passing 
of time. It follows by necessity, then, that before the world there would 
have been time that had passed, ending up with the world's existence. 
(85) [To this we] say: 
(86) The basic thing understood by the two expressions is the 
existence of an essence and the nonexistence of an essence. The third 
thing, by virtue of which there is a difference between the two expres­
sions, is a relation necessary with respect to us [only]. The proof of this 
is that if we suppose the nonexistence of the world in the future and 
suppose for us a later existence, then we would say, "God was and the 
world was not," this statement being true regardless of whether we 
intend by it the first nonexistence or the second nonexistence, which 
is after existence. The sign that this is relative is that the future itself 
can become a past and is expressed in the past tense. All this is due to 
the inability of the estimative [faculty] to comprehend an existence that 
has a beginning except by supposing a "before" for it. This "before," 
from which the estimation does not detach itself, is believed to be a 
thing realized, existing—namely, time. This is similar to the inability of 
the estimation to suppose the finitude of body overhead, for example, 

Page 94: [No Text Extracted]

Page 95:
33 Discussion 1 
except in terms of a surface that has an "above," thereby imagining that 
beyond the world there is a place, either filled or void. Thus, if it is said 
that there is no "above" above the surface of the world and no distance 
more distant than it, the estimation holds back from acquiescing to it, 
5 just as if it is said that before the world's existence there is no "before" 
which is realized in existence, [and the estimation] shies away from 
accepting it. 
(87) [Now,]14 one may hold estimation to be false in its supposition 
that above the world there is a void—namely, an infinite extension—by 
10 saying to it: "The void is in itself incomprehensible." As regards exten­
sion, it is a concomitant of body whose dimensions are extended. If body 
is finite, the extension which is its concomitant is finite and filled space 
terminates [with the surface of the world], whereas the void is incom­
prehensible. It is thus established that beyond the world there is neither 
15 void nor filled space, even though the estimation does not acquiesce to 
accepting [this]. Similarly, it will be said that, just as spatial extension is 
a concomitant of body, temporal extension is a concomitant of motion. 
For the latter is the spreading out of motion, just as the former is the 
spreading out of spatial dimensions. And, just as the proof for the 
20 finitude of the dimensions of the body prohibits affirming a spatial 
dimension beyond it, the proof for the finitude of motion at both ends 
prohibits affirming a temporal extension before it, even though the esti­
mation clings to its imagining it and its supposing it, not desisting from 
[this]. There is no difference between temporal extension that, in rela-
25 tion [to us], divides verbally into "before" and "after" and spatial exten­
sion that, in relation [to us], divides into "above" and "below." If, then, it 
is legitimate to affirm an "above" that has no above, it is legitimate to 
affirm a "before" that has no real before, except an estimative imaginary 
[one], as with the "above." This is a necessary consequence. Let it then 
30 be contemplated. For they agreed that beyond the world there is neither 
void nor filled space. 
(88) To this [the philosophers] may say: 
(89) This comparison is contorted because the world has neither 
an "above" nor a "below," being, rather, spherical; and the sphere has 
35 neither an "above" nor a "below." Rather, if a direction is called "above" 

Page 96: [No Text Extracted]

Page 97:
34 Discussion 1 
this is inasmuch as it is beyond your head; the other [direction is called] 
"below" insofar as it extends beyond your foot. [These are] innovated 
[names] given [them] in relation to you. The direction which is "below" 
in relation to you is "above" in relation to another if you suppose him to 
5 be on the opposite side of the globe, standing in such a way that the arch 
of his foot is opposite the arch of your foot. Indeed, the direction of parts 
of the heavens which in the daytime you suppose to be "above" you is the 
very same one that at night is "below" the globe. What is "below" reverts 
to being "above" the earth through the heavenly rotation. As for the first 
10 [point in time] for the world's existence, it cannot be conceived to 
change so as to become the last. An example of this is when we suppose 
a piece of wood, one end of which is thick [and] the other thin, agreeing 
to name the direction close to the narrow end "above," as far as it goes, 
[and] the other side "below"—through this, no essential difference in 
15 the parts of the world manifests itself. Rather, these are different names 
dependent on the shape of this piece of wood, so that if its position is 
reversed, the name is reversed, the world remaining unchanged. "Above" 
and "below" [constitute] a relation purely to you in terms of which no 
change in the parts and surfaces of the world is effected. 
20 (90) But the nonexistence that precedes the world [terminating with] 
the first limit of [the world's] existence is essential; [it is] inconceivable 
for it to interchange and become last. Nor is it conceivable for the sup­
posed nonexistence when the world is extinguished, which is a subsequent 
nonexistence, to become antecedent. Thus, the two limits of the world's 
25 nonexistence, one being the first, the other the second, are essential, 
established limits whose interchange through the change of relations is 
utterly inconceivable. This is different from the "above" and the "below." 
Hence, it is possible for us to say, "The world has neither an 'above' nor 
a 'below,'" whereas you cannot say, "There is neither a 'before' nor an 
30 'after' for the world's existence." If, then, the "before" and "after" have 
been established, there is no meaning for time except in terms of what is 
expressed by "before" and "after." 
(91) [To this] we say: 

Page 98: [No Text Extracted]

Page 99:
35 Discussion 1 
(92) This makes no difference. There is no [particular] purpose in 
assigning the utterance "above" and "below," but we will shift to the 
expressions "beyond" and "outside" and say, "The world has an inside 
and an outside: is there, then, outside the world something which is 
5 either filled or empty space?" [The philosophers] will then say, "Beyond 
the world there is neither a void nor filled space. If by 'outside' you mean 
its outermost surface, then it would have an outside; but if you mean 
something else, then it has no outside." Similarly, if we are asked, "Does 
the world have a 'before'?" we answer, "If by this is meant, 'Does the 
10 world's existence have a beginning—that is, a limit in which it began?' 
then the world has a 'before' in this sense, just as the world has an 'out­
side' on the interpretation that this is its exposed limit and bounding 
surface. If you mean by it anything else, then the world has no 'before'— 
just as, when one means by 'outside the world' [something] other than its 
15 surface, then one would say, 'There is no exterior to the world.' Should 
you say that a beginning of an existence that has no 'before' is incom­
prehensible, it would then be said, 'A finite bodily existence that has no 
outside is incomprehensible.' If you say that its 'outside' is its surface 
with which it terminates, [and] nothing more, we will say that its 'before' 
20 is the beginning of its existence which is its limit, [and] nothing more." 
(93) There remains for us to say: 
(94) God has an existence without the world. [Saying] this much also 
does not necessarily entail affirming another thing. What proves that 
[affirming another thing] is the work of the estimation is that [this 
25 faculty] is specifically related to time and space. For, even though the 
opponent believes in the eternity of the [world's] body, his estimative 
faculty acquiesces to the supposition of its temporal origin. Although 
we believe in its temporal origination, our estimative faculty may yet 
acquiesce to the supposition of its eternity—this with respect to body. 
30 But when we return to time, the opponent is unable to suppose the com­
ing into being of a time which has no "before." [Now, normally,] what is 
contrary to belief can be posited in the estimative faculty as a supposi­
tion and a hypothesis. But this, as with space, is one of the things that 
cannot be placed within the estimative faculty. For neither the believer 
35 in the body's finitude nor the one who disbelieves it is able to suppose 
a body beyond which there is neither a void nor a filled space, their 
estimative faculties not acquiescing to the acceptance of this. But it is 
said, "If clear reason, through proof, does not disallow the existence of 

Page 100: [No Text Extracted]

Page 101:
36 Discussion 1 
a finite body, then one must not heed the estimation." Similarly, clear 
reason does not disallow a first beginning that is preceded by nothing; 
and if the estimation falls short of grasping this, one must not heed it. 
For the estimative faculty, never being acquainted with a finite body that 
5 does not have beside it [either] another body or air, which it imagines 
to be a void, is unable to grasp [its contrary] in the unseen. Similarly, 
the estimative faculty has never had acquaintance with an event that 
does not occur after something else. It is thus incapable of supposing a 
temporal event that has no "before," this being [for it] an existing thing 
10 that has passed. 
(95) This, then, is the cause of the error. With this objection, resis­
tance [to the philosophers] achieves [its end]. 
Another pattern [of argument the philosophers] have 
for rendering the pre-eternity of time necessary 
(96) They say: 
(97) No doubt, according to you, God was able to create the world 
15 before He created it by a year, a hundred years, a thousand years, [and 
so on,] and these hypothesized [magnitudes] surpass each other in 
measure and quantity. There is, hence, no escape from affirming [the 
existence] of something prior to the world's existence—[something] 
that is extended and measured, parts of which are more extended and 
20 longer than others. If you say, "One cannot apply the expression 'years' 
except after the heavens' creation and its rotation," we will abandon 
the expression "years" and put the matter in a different mold, saying: "If 
we suppose that since the world's first existence its sphere up to the pre­
sent has made, for example, a thousand revolutions, would God [praised 
25 be He] have been able to create before it a second world, similar to it, 
such that it would have made up to the present time eleven hundred 
rotations?" If you say, "No," it would be as though the Eternal has 
changed from impotence to capability or the world from impossibility 
to possibility [—which is absurd]. If you say, "Yes"—and this [you] must— 
30 [it would then be asked,] "Would He have been able to create a third 
world that would have rotated up to the present twelve hundred times?" 
A "Yes" here is inevitable. We would then say: "Could this world, which, 
according to the order of our hypothesizing, we have named 'third,' even 

Page 102: [No Text Extracted]

Page 103:
37 Discussion 1 
though it is the earlier, have been created with the world which has been 
called 'second,' the former making up to the present twelve hundred 
rotations, the latter eleven hundred, yet both equivalent as regards the 
distance covered by their motions and velocities?" If you say, "Yes," this 
5 would be impossible. For it is impossible for two motions to be equal in 
rapidity and slowness and then reach the same point in time when the 
number [of their rotations] is unequal. If [on the other hand] you say [as 
you must]: [(a)] that the third world, which up to now has made twelve 
hundred revolutions, cannot be created simultaneously with the second 
10 world, which up to the present has made eleven hundred revolutions; 
[(b)] that, indeed, God must have created [the former] earlier by a 
measure equal to the one by which the second world precedes the first— 
we call [this latter] the first because it is closer to our estimative faculty, 
since it is to it, in making our hypothetical measure, [that] we date back 
15 from the present; [(c)] that [consequently] the measure of one possible 
would be double that of the other and that [hence] there would have to 
be another possible that is double the whole—[if you must admit all this,] 
then the possibility measured by quantity, parts of which are lengthier 
than others by a known amount, has no other reality except time. 
20 (98) For these hypothetical measures do not constitute an attribute 
of the Creator's essence—exalted be He above hypothesized measures. 
Nor are they an attribute of the world's nonexistence, since nonexistence 
is not a thing so as to be measured by different magnitudes. [Now,] quan­
tity is an attribute. Hence, it calls for something that has quantity. This 
25 [something] is none other than motion; and quantity is none other than 
time, which is the measure of motion. Hence, there is, for you, prior to 
the world something that had different quantities—namely, time. Hence, 
for you, before the world there was time. 
(99) [Our] objection [to this is to say]: 
30 (100) All this is the work of the estimation. The quickest way to 
rebut it is to put space in the place of time. For we would then say: "Did 
it lie within God's power to create the highest heaven greater in thickness 
by one cubit than the one He had created?" If they say, "No," this would 
be [the attribution to Him of] impotence. If they say, "Yes," then [it fol-
35 lows that God could have created it] greater by two cubits, three cubits, 
and so on, ascending ad infinitum. We would then say: "In this there is 

Page 104: [No Text Extracted]

Page 105:
38 Discussion 1 
the affirmation of a dimension beyond the world that has measure and 
quantity, since that which is greater by two cubits does not occupy [the 
equivalent space] which the [one] greater by one cubit occupies. Accord­
ing to this, then, beyond the world there is quantity, requiring thus that 
5 which is quantified—namely, either body or the void. Hence, beyond the 
world there is either void or filled space. What, then, is the answer to 
this?" Similarly [we can ask]: "Was God able to create the world's sphere 
smaller by one cubit, then by two, and is there not between the two hypo­
thetical possibilities a difference in terms of what is eliminated by way 
10 of filled space and the occupation of space?" For the abolished filled 
space with the lessening by two cubits is greater than what is abolished 
with the lessening of one cubit. As such, the void would be measured.15 
But the void is nothing: how could it be measured? Our answer regard­
ing the estimative faculty's act of making one imagine the supposition 
15 of temporal possibilities before the world's existence is similar to your 
answer regarding the estimative faculty's act of inducing one to imagine 
the supposition of spatial possibilities beyond the world's existence. 
There is no difference [here]. 
(101) [The philosophers, however,] may say: 
20 (102) We do not say that that which is not possible is within [divine] 
power. The world's being greater or smaller than it is, is impossible. 
Hence, it is not within [divine] power. 
(103) [We answer:] This excuse is false in three respects. 
(104) The first is that this is an affront to reason. For, in supposing 
25 the world larger or smaller than it is by a cubit, the mind is not suppos­
ing what is akin to conjoining blackness and whiteness [in one and the 
same place: namely, existence and nonexistence. The impossible consists 
of conjoining negation and affirmation. All impossibilities reduce to this. 
[Your argument,] hence, is arbitrary, silly, false. 
30 (105) The second is that, if the world as it is cannot be greater or 
smaller, then its existence as it is would be necessary, not possible. But 
the necessary has no need for a cause. Uphold, then, what the material­
ists uphold by way of denying the Maker and denying the cause that is 
the Cause of [all] Causes. But this is not your doctrine. 

Page 106: [No Text Extracted]

Page 107:
39 Discussion 1 
(106) The third is that the opponent is not unable to oppose this 
false [argument] with its like. Thus, we would say, "The world's existence 
prior to its existence was not possible, but existence coincided with 
possibility—nothing more, nothing less." Should you say that [in this case] 
5 the Eternal would have changed from power to impotence, we answer: 
"No, because existence then was not possible and, hence, not [enactable 
by] power; and the impossibility of realizing what is not possible does not 
indicate impotence." Should you say, "How was it impossible and how did 
it then become possible?" we answer, "Why should it not be impossible 
10 at one [temporal] state [and] possible at another?" Should you say, "But 
the [temporal] states are equal," it would be said to you, "[Spatial] mag­
nitudes are equal; how, then, can one magnitude be possible, while one 
larger or smaller by the measure of a fingernail is impossible? If this, 
then, is not impossible, the [former] is not impossible." This, then, is the 
15 way of opposition. 
(107) The verification in answering [them] is [to say that] what they 
have mentioned regarding the hypothesized possibilities is meaningless. 
What one [must] admit is that God, exalted be He, is eternal and power­
ful. Action is never impossible for Him, if He wills it. In all this there is 
20 nothing that necessitates affirming [a limitless] extended time, unless 
the estimative faculty, in its confusion, adds [to time] some other thing. 
A third proof they have for the world's pre-eternity 
[First discussion: Third proof] 
(108) They held fast [to their view] by saying: 
(109) The existence of the world is possible before its existence, since 
it is impossible for it to be impossible and then to become possible. This 
25 possibility has no beginning; that is, it is ever established, the world's pos­
sibility never ceasing, since there is no temporal state whatsoever in which 
the world's existence can be described as impossible. If, then, [this] pos­
sibility never ceases, the possible in conformity with possibility also never 
ceases. For the meaning of our saying that its existence is possible is that 
30 its existence is not impossible. Hence, if its existence is eternally possible, 

Page 108: [No Text Extracted]

Page 109:
40 Discussion 1 
its existence is eternally not impossible. Otherwise, if the impossibility 
of its existence is eternal, our saying that its existence is eternally possi­
ble is false. And if our statement that its existence is eternally possible is 
false, then our statement that the possibility never ceases is false. And, 
5 if our statement that the possibility never ceases is false, then our state­
ment that possibility has a beginning becomes true. But, if it is true that 
it has a beginning, then before that it was impossible. This leads to 
affirming a time in which the world was impossible and over which God 
had no power. 
10 (HO) The objection [to this] is to say: 
(111) The world [is such] that it is eternally possible for it to be tem­
porally originated. No doubt, then, that there is no [single] moment of 
time but wherein its creation could not but be conceived; but, if it is sup­
posed to exist eternally, then it would not be temporally originated. The 
15 factual, then, would not be in conformity with possibility, but contrary to 
it. This is similar to what you [philosophers] say about place—namely, 
that supposing it [to be] larger than it is or [that] creating a body above 
the world is possible, and likewise another on top of the latter, and so on 
ad infinitum. Thus, there is no limit to the possibility of increase. Despite 
20 this, the existence of filled space which is absolute, having no limit, is 
impossible. Similarly, an existence whose [temporal] end [in the past] is 
not finite is not possible. Rather, just as it is said that the possible is a 
body whose surface is finite, but whose measures in terms of largeness 
and smallness are not specified, so, too, [it is] for that whose creation in 
25 time is possible. The beginnings of existence are not specified with 
respect to priority and posteriority, but [it is only] the principle of being 
temporally created that is specified. For [the temporally created world 
alone] is the possible—no other. 
A fourth proof 
[First discussion: Fourth proof] 
(112) They say: 
30 (113) [In the case of] every temporal existent, the matter in it pre­
cedes it, since no temporal existent dispenses with matter. Matter, then, 
is not a temporally created [existent], the temporally created [existents] 
being the forms, accidents, and qualities [that occur] to materials. The 

Page 110: [No Text Extracted]

Page 111:
41 Discussion 1 
proof for this is that, prior to existence, every temporal being is either 
possible in existence, impossible in existence, or necessary in existence. 
It cannot be impossible, because that which in itself is impossible never 
exists at all. It is impossible for it to be a necessary existent in itself, for 
5 that which is necessary in itself never ceases to exist at all. This proves 
that it is possible in existence in itself. Hence, the possibility of existence 
obtains for it before its existence. But the possibility of existence is a 
relative characterization that is not self-subsistent. It must, hence, need a 
receptacle to which to relate, and there is no receptacle except matter.16 
10 [This is just] as when we say, "This matter is receptive of heat and cold, 
blackness and whiteness, or motion and rest," meaning that it is possible 
for it to have these qualities originate in it and these changes occur to it. 
Possibility thus becomes a description of matter. But matter does not 
have matter [receptive of it], and it is, hence, impossible for it to origi-
75 nate in time. For, if it were to originate in time, then the possibility of its 
existence would precede its existence and the possibility would then 
be self-subsistent, not related to anything, when it is [in fact] a relative 
description [and is] incomprehensible as self-subsisting. 
(114) It is not possible to say that the meaning of possibility reduces 
20 to its being [something] within the power [of enactment] and to the 
Eternal's having the power [to enact it]. For we do not know that a thing 
is within the power [of being enacted] except by its being possible. Thus, 
we say, "It is within the power [of being enacted] because it is possible 
and not within the power [of being enacted] because it is not possible." 
25 If our statement, "It is possible," reduces to its being within the power 
[of being enacted], then it is as if we have said, "It is within the power [of 
being enacted] because it is within the power [of enactment] and it is 
not within the power [of being enacted] because it is not within the 
power [of enactment]," which is defining a thing in terms of itself. This 
30 indicates that its being possible is another proposition in the mind that 
is clear, in terms of which the second proposition—namely, that it is 
within the power [of being enacted]—is known. It is [further] impossible 
for this to reduce to the knowledge of the Eternal of its being possible. 
For knowledge requires a knowable. Hence, the possibility that is known 
33 is necessarily other than the knowledge. Moreover, [possibility] is a rela­
tive description. It inevitably requires an entity to which it is related. 
And this is nothing other than matter. Hence, every temporally origi­
nated thing is preceded by matter. Primary matter is thus in no circum­
stance originated. 

Page 112: [No Text Extracted]

Page 113:
42 Discussion 1 
(115) The objection [to this] is to say: 
(116) The possibility which they have mentioned reverts to a judgment 
of the mind. Anything whose existence the mind supposes, [nothing] 
preventing its supposing it, we call "possible"; and, if [it is] prevented, we 
5 call [it] "impossible"; and, if it is unable to suppose its nonexistence, 
we name it "necessary." For these are rational propositions that do not 
require an existent so as to be rendered a description thereof, as proven 
by three things. 
(117) One of them is that, if possibility requires something existing 
10 to which to relate and of which it is said that it is its possibility, then 
impossibility would require something existing of which one would say 
that it is its impossibility. But the impossible in itself has no existence, 
and there is no matter to which impossibility occurs such that impossi­
bility would be [rendered] related to matter. 
15 (11^) The second is that the mind judges blackness and whiteness to be 
possible before their existence. If this possibility is related to the body to 
which they occur, so as to say, "This means that it is possible for the body 
to become black or white," then whiteness in itself is not possible and does 
not have the description of possibility. The possible would then be only 
20 the body, possibility being related to it [alone]. [To this,] then, we would 
say, "What is the judgment [pertaining] to blackness in itself—is it pos­
sible, necessary, or impossible?" But there is no way out of saying that it 
is possible. This shows that the mind, in judging possibility, does not need 
to posit [something] having existence to which it would relate possibility. 
25 (H9) The third is that the souls of humans, according to [the philoso­
phers], are substances that subsist in themselves, neither in a body nor in 
matter, and are not imprinted in matter. [Moreover,] they are created 
in time, according to what Avicenna and the rigorous among [the philoso­
phers] have chosen [to believe]. These [souls, according to them,] have 
30 [their] possibility before their creation, but they have neither entity nor 
matter. Their possibility, hence, is a relative description. It does not 
reduce to the power [to create them] of the One endowed with power 
and to the Agent. To what, then, does it revert? This difficulty is thus 
turned against them. 

Page 114: [No Text Extracted]

Page 115:
43 Discussion 1 
(120) [The philosophers, however,] may say: 
(121) Reducing possibility to the judgment of the mind is impossible, 
since there is no meaning to the judgment of the mind except knowledge 
of possibility. Possibility is, hence, known, and it is other than knowledge. 
5 Rather, knowledge encompasses it, follows it, and relates to it as it is.17 If 
knowledge is supposed to cease, the object of knowledge does not cease; 
whereas if the object of knowledge ceases to exist, knowledge [of it] ceases. 
Hence, knowledge and its object are two [distinct] things; one follows, 
[and] the other is followed. If we [were to] suppose rational people [to] 
10 desist from supposing possibility and [to] be unaware of it, we would say, 
"Possibility is not removed, the possibles being, rather, [possible] in them­
selves; but the minds are oblivious of them." Or, [if we suppose] minds 
and rational people to cease to exist, possibility would inevitably remain. 
(122) As regards the three things, these do not entail a [valid] argu-
15 ment. For impossibility is also a relative description that requires an 
existent to which it would relate. The meaning of the impossible is the 
[simultaneous] combining of two opposites [in one place]. Thus, if the 
receptacle is white, it would be impossible for it to become black with the 
[continued] existence of white. Hence, there must be a subject to which 
20 one refers, qualified with a description, and [it is] then that it is said: 
"Its opposite is impossible for it to have." Impossibility would thus be 
a relative description subsisting in the subject to which it is related. As 
for necessity, it is no hidden matter that it relates to necessary existence. 
(123) As for the second—namely, blackness being in itself possible— 
25 this is an error. For, if it is taken in abstraction without a receptacle in 
which it inheres, it would be impossible, not possible. It only becomes 
possible when it is reckoned as an appearance18 in a body. The body is 
disposed for the interchange of appearance, interchange [of appear­
ances] over the body being possible. Otherwise, blackness has no identity 
30 unto itself so as to have possibility ascribed to it. 
(124) With regards to the third—namely, the soul—for some it is 
eternal but has the possibility of attaching to bodies. Thus, with respect 
to this [doctrine, what you say] does not necessarily follow. Among those 
who admit its temporal origination, one group has believed that it is 

Page 116: [No Text Extracted]

Page 117:
44 Discussion 1 
imprinted in matter, consequent upon [the bodily] humors, as Galen has 
indicated in certain places. As such, [the soul] would be in matter and its 
possibility related to its matter. 
(125) With respect to the doctrine of those who admit that it is 
5 temporally originated but is not imprinted [in matter], this means that 
matter has the possibility of being managed by a rational soul. The 
possibility that precedes origination would thus be related to matter. For, 
although not imprinted in [matter, the soul] has a relation to it, since it 
is that which governs and uses it. Possibility would thus refer back to 
10 [matter] in this way. 
(126) The answer [to all this is to say]: 
(127) To refer possibility, necessity, and impossibility back to rational 
judgments is correct. [In reference] to what has been mentioned— 
namely, that the meaning of the mind's judgment is [its] knowledge and 
15 that knowledge requires an object of knowledge—we say: "[Modality as 
a judgment of the mind] has an object of knowledge in the same way 
that being a color, animality, and the rest of the universal propositions 
are, according to them, fixed in the mind, these being cognitions that are 
not said to have no objects of knowledge." Yet the objects of their knowl-
20 edge have no existence in the concrete—so [much so] that the philoso­
phers have declared that universals exist in the mind, not in the concrete: 
what exist in the concrete are only individual particulars that are per­
ceived by the senses, not conceived, but are the cause for the mind's 
snatching from them an intellectual proposition, abstracted from matter. 
25 Hence, being a color is a single proposition in the mind, other than black­
ness and whiteness. One cannot conceive in existence a color which is 
neither white nor black nor some other color. The form of being a color, 
however, is established in the mind without detailing [different species 
of color], and one says of it that it is a form whose existence is in minds, 
30 not in concrete things. If this is not impossible, then what we have men­
tioned is not impossible. 
(128) As for their saying that, if one supposes the nonexistence of 
rational beings or their unawareness [of possibility], possibility would not 
cease, we say: "If their nonexistence is supposed, would the universal 
35 propositions—namely, genera and species—cease to exist?" If they say, 
"Yes, since they have no meaning except as propositions in the mind," 

Page 118: [No Text Extracted]

Page 119:
45 Discussion 1 
then this is what we would say about possibility, there being no difference 
between the two cases. If, however, they claim that they remain in the 
knowledge of God, the same would be said of possibility. The necessary 
consequence [forced on them] hence obtains. What is intended [here] is 
J to show the contradiction of their words. 
(129) As for [their] excuse regarding impossibility—namely, that it is 
[always] related to matter qualified by something, the opposite of which is 
prevented from [being with] it—this is not the case with everything that 
is impossible. For the existence of a partner to God is impossible when 
10 there is no matter to which [this] impossibility would be related. Should 
they claim that the meaning of the impossibility of a partner is [simply] 
that the singularity of God, exalted be He, in His essence and His being 
alone, are necessary, singularity being related to Him, we would say: 
(130) [This singularity] is not necessary, according to their principles. 
15 For the world [they maintain] coexists with Him. He is, thus, not solitary. 
If they claim that His being singularly set aside from a similar [being] is 
necessary, the opposite of the necessary being the impossible, which is a 
relation to Him, we say: "We mean that God's being set aside from [the 
world] is not akin to His being set aside from the similar. For His being 
20 set aside from the similar is necessary, whereas His being set aside from 
the created contingent things is not necessary." We thus undertake relat­
ing possibility to Him by this device,19 as they have undertaken it in 
returning impossibility to His essence by changing the expression 
"impossibility" to "necessity," then relating singularity to Him using the 
25 qualification "necessary." 
(131) As for the excuse regarding blackness and whiteness—namely, 
that they have neither a singular self nor essence—the answer is, "Yes," 
if by this is meant in [extramental] existence. If, however, they mean by 
this in the mind, then [the answer is], "No." For the mind apprehends 
30 universal blackness and judges it to be in itself possible. 
(132) Furthermore, the excuse regarding the created souls is false. 
For they have singular entities and a possibility preceding [their] origi­
nation. But there is nothing [material] to which this [possibility] relates. 
[Regarding] their statement that matter [is such] that it is possible for 
35 it to be governed by the soul, this is a far-fetched relation. If you find 
this sufficient, then it would not be far-fetched to say that the meaning 
of the possibility of the created [souls] is that it is possible within the 
realm of the One capable of creating them to create them. [Possibility] 
would thus be a relation [belonging] to the Agent without its being 
40 imprinted in Him, in the same way as it would be [for the philosophers] 

Page 120: [No Text Extracted]

Page 121:
46 Discussion 1 
a relation to the body receptive of action, even though it is not imprinted 
in it. There is no difference between the relation to the agent and the 
relation to the patient if there is no imprinting in either case. 
(133) If it is said, "In all the objections, you have relied on counter-
5 acting difficulties by [raising other] difficulties, without solving any 
of the problematic [the philosophers] have brought with them," we say: 
(134) The objection necessarily shows the falsity of the argumentation. 
The problematic facet is resolved in evaluating the objection and what is 
being demanded [of the opponent]. In this book we have undertaken 
10 only to muddy their doctrine and throw dust in the face of their proofs 
with that which would reveal their incoherence. We have not undertaken 
to defend a specific doctrine and thus have not departed from the pur­
pose of this book. We will not go exhaustively into the proofs for the 
[world's] temporal creation, since our purpose is to refute their claim 
15 that they have knowledge of [its] pre-eternity. As regards affirming the 
true doctrine, we will write another book concerning it after completing 
this one, if success comes to our aid, God willing, and we will name it The 
Principles of Belief}0 In it we will devote ourselves to affirming, just as in 
this work we have devoted ourselves to destroying; and God knows best. 

Page 122: [No Text Extracted]

Page 123:
[Second] Discussion 
On refuting their statement on the 
post-eternity of the world, time, and motion 
(1) Let it be known that this question is a branch of the first. For, 
according to them, just as the world is pre-eternal, having no beginning 
for its existence, it is [also] post-eternal, having no end, its corruption 
and annihilation being inconceivable. Rather, it has always continued [to 
5 be] in this way, and in this way it will also continue [to be]. 
(2) Their four proofs for the [world's] pre-eternity which we have men­
tioned are applicable to its post-eternity, and the objection [to them] is the 
same, without difference. For they say that the world is caused, its cause be­
ing eternal in the past and the future, the effect thus [coexisting] with the 
10 cause. They [also] say that, if the cause does not change, the effect does not 
change; and on this [premise] they built [the proof] for the impossibility of 
the world's temporal origination. This very [argument] is applicable to [the 
argument for] the [world's not] coming to an end. This is their first approach. 
(3) Their second approach is to argue that, if the world is annihilated, 
15 its annihilation would take place after its existence. It would thus have an 
"after," and this entails the affirmation of time. 
(4) Their third approach is that the possibility of existence never 
ceases. Similarly, possible existence can be1 [eternal] in conformity 
with [ceaseless] possibility. This proof, however, has no strength. For we 
20 maintain that it is impossible for it to be pre-eternal but do not hold 
it impossible for it to be post-eternal if God, exalted be He, makes it 
endure everlastingly. For it is not a necessary requirement for that which 
is temporally originated that it should have an end, whereas it is a nec­
essary requirement of the act to be temporally originated and have a 
25 beginning. No one maintains that the world should necessarily have an 
-47-

Page 124: [No Text Extracted]

Page 125:
48 Discussion 2 
end except Abu al-Hudhayl al-cAllaf.2 For he said: "Just as an infinite 
number of past [heavenly] rotations is impossible, the same is true of the 
future." But this is false, because the future does not enter at all into 
existence, either successively or concomitantly, whereas all of the past 
J has entered into existence successively, even though not concomitantly. 
And, if it has become evident that we do not deem it rationally remote 
for the world's duration to be everlasting, but regard either its rendering 
it eternal in the future or annihilating it as [both] possible, then which of 
the two possibilities becomes fact is only known through the revealed 
10 law. Hence, the examination of this [question] is not connected with 
what is rationally apprehended. 
(5) As for their fourth approach, it runs [a course parallel to their 
fourth proof of the world's pre-eternity]. For they say that, if the world is 
annihilated, the possibility of its existence remains, since the possible 
15 does not change into the impossible. But [possibility] is a relational 
description. Hence, every temporal existent, as they claim, needs a pre­
vious matter, and every annihilated thing needs matter from which it is 
annihilated. For materials and principles are not annihilated. It is only 
the forms and accidents inherent in them that are annihilated. 
20 (6) The answer to all this is identical with what has been previously 
stated [in refuting their doctrine of a pre-eternal world]. We have only 
singled out this problem [for additional discussion] because they have 
two other proofs regarding it. 
(7) The first is that to which Galen has held fast inasmuch as he said: 
25 (8) If the sun, for example, were receptive of annihilation, then in 
[the course of] a long period of time some withering would have appeared 
in it. But the astronomical observations indicating its size, [carried out] 
in the course of thousands of years, indicate only this [same] size. Hence, 
inasmuch as it has not withered throughout these lengthy ages, [this] 
30 shows that it will not be corrupted. 
(9) The objection to this [is raised] from several perspectives. 
(10) The first is that the form of the proof is expressed by saying: 
"If the sun will be corrupted, then it must undergo withering." But the 
consequent is impossible; hence, the antecedent is impossible. This is a 
35 syllogism termed by them "the [hypothetical] conjunctive conditional." 
This conclusion, however, does not follow necessarily because the ante­
cedent is not true unless another condition is added—namely, his [hav­
ing] to say that, if [something] is corrupted, then it must wither. This 
latter does not follow from the first premise except with the addition of 

Page 126: [No Text Extracted]

Page 127:
49 Discussion 2 
a condition—namely, that we say, "If it is to be corrupted by way of with­
ering, then it must wither in the long period of time," or if it is shown 
that there is no corruption except byway of withering so [as to have] the 
consequent necessarily follow [from] the antecedent. But we do not con-
5 cede that a thing is corrupted only byway of withering. Rather, withering 
is but one way of [a thing's] corruption. It is not improbable for a thing, 
when in its state of perfection, to be corrupted suddenly [all at once]. 
(11) The second is that, even if this is conceded—namely, that there 
can be no corruption except through withering—how would [Galen] 
10 know that no withering afflicted [the sun]? As to his turning to astronom­
ical observations, it is impossible [for these to yield such information], 
since they only give knowledge of the size [of the sun] by approximation. 
Should the sun—which is said to be a hundred and seventy times larger 
than the earth, or close to this—be diminished by the size of mountains, 
15 for example, this would not be apparent to the senses. Thus, it may well 
be undergoing a process of withering and [may] have been, up till now, 
diminished by the amount of [several] mountains and more. The senses, 
however, would have been unable to apprehend this because estimating 
[such an amount] is known in the science of optics only by approximation. 
20 This is similar to the case of rubies and gold, which, according to [the 
philosophers], are composed of elements and are subject to corruption. 
If, then, a ruby is placed [somewhere] for a hundred years, what dimin­
ished of it would be imperceptible. Perhaps the ratio of what diminishes 
from the sun during the period of the history of astronomical observations 
25 is the same as what diminishes of the ruby in a hundred years, this being 
something imperceptible. This shows that his proof is exceedingly bad. 
(12) We have refrained from introducing many a proof of this kind, 
which rational people find feeble, bringing forth this one [only] to pro­
vide a lesson and [as] an example of what we have left out. We have con-
30 fined ourselves to the four proofs that require exertion in resolving their 
sophistical difficulties, as we have seen. 
(13) The second proof they have for the impossibility of the world's 
annihilation consists in their saying: 
(14) The substances of the world never cease to exist because a cause 
35 for their annihilation is not rationally comprehensible. That which had 
not been nonexistent and then becomes nonexistent would inevitably 
have become [nonexistent] due to a cause. This cause would have had to 

Page 128: [No Text Extracted]

Page 129:
50 Discussion 2 
be either the will of the Eternal (an impossibility, since, if He were not 
a wilier of [the world's] annihilation and then became a wilier of it, He 
would have changed); or this may lead to the consequence that the Eter­
nal and His will are of the same description in all states, but that the 
5 object of the will would change from nonexistence to existence, then 
from existence to nonexistence. But what we have stated of the impossi­
bility of the existence of a temporal event through an eternal will proves 
the impossibility of the [world's future] annihilation. 
(15) There is here, moreover, an additional difficulty, stronger than 
10 this—namely, that the thing willed is necessarily the act of the wilier. 
[In the case of] anyone who was not acting and then becomes an actor, 
even if he were not to change in himself, his act would [still] necessarily 
have come into existence after being nonexistent. For if [the agent] 
remains as he had been, having not acted and now also not acting, he 
15 would then not have enacted a thing. Nonexistence is not a thing. How 
could it then be an act? If, then, He annihilates the world and an act 
which did not previously exist comes anew for Him, what, then, is this 
act? Is it the world's existence? But this is impossible, since [its] exis­
tence would have ceased. Or is His act the nonexistence of the world? 
20 But the nonexistence of the world is not a thing so as to be an act. For 
the least degree of an act is for it to be existing. But the nonexistence of 
the world is not a thing that exists so as to say that it is the thing which 
the agent enacted and which was brought into existence by the One who 
brings about existence. 
25 (16) Due to the difficulty posed by this, [the philosophers] claimed, 
the theologians, in striving to disengage from it, have divided into four 
groups, each group committing an impossible [absurdity]. 
(17) As for the Muctazila, they said: "His act that proceeds from 
Him exists, [this] being annihilation, which He creates in no place. The 
30 whole world then ceases to exist all at once, and the created annihilation 
ceases to exist by itself so as not to require another annihilation [to anni­
hilate it, and so on,] leading to an infinite regress." 
(18) This [argument, the philosophers continue,] is false in several 
respects. One of them is that "annihilation" is not an existent that is 
35 rationally comprehensible such that one [can] hypothesize its creation. 
Moreover, if it were an existent, how is it, then, that it would cease to exist 
by itself without an annihilator? Again, by what would the world be anni­
hilated? For, if [annihilation] were to be created in the world itself and 
indwell therein, this would be impossible. This is because what inheres 

Page 130: [No Text Extracted]

Page 131:
51 Discussion 2 
meets the receptacle, so that they combine, even if for but one moment. 
But, if their combining is possible, they would not be two contraries, and 
[the created annihilation] would not annihilate [the world]. If [on the 
other hand] He were to create [annihilation] neither in the world nor in 
5 a receptacle, then how would its existence oppose the world's existence? 
Then there is an additional repugnancy in this doctrine—namely, that 
God is incapable of annihilating some of the world's substances but not 
others. Indeed, He would be capable only of bringing about an annihila­
tion that annihilates the whole world. For, if [annihilation] is not in any 
10 place, then its relation to [each of] the totality [of things] is of one pattern.3 
(19) The second party is the Karramiyya, inasmuch as they have said 
that His act is [the act of] annihilation, annihilation being, in effect, an 
existent which He creates in His own essence—may He be exalted above 
what they say—through which the world becomes annihilated. Similarly, 
15 existence, according to them, [takes place] through an act of bringing 
existence into being which He creates in Himself, whereby that which 
[would] exist through [such an act] becomes an existent. This is also false, 
since it entails the Eternal's being a receptacle of temporal happenings. 
Moreover, it is a departure from what is intelligible, since the only thing 
20 comprehensible about an act that brings about existence is that the exis-
lenl [it produces] is related to Will and Power. Hence, to affirm anything 
other than Will and Power and the existence of the enactable by Power— 
namely, the world—is unintelligible. The same applies to annihilation. 
(20) The third group are the Ashcarites, who said: "Regarding the acci-
25 denls, these cease to exist by themselves, their enduring being inconceiv­
able. For, if their enduring is conceivable, then their annihilation becomes 
inconceivable for this [very] meaning.4 As for substances, they do not 
endure by themselves but endure by virtue of an endurance which is addi­
tional to their existence. If God does not create endurance, [the substance] 
30 is annihilated due to the nonexistence of that which renders it enduring." 
(21) This is also false, for it entails a contradiction of what is 
perceived by the senses [when it maintains that] blackness does not 
endure—likewise whiteness—and that [their] existence is constantly 
renewed. The mind is repelled by this as it is repelled by someone's state-
35 ment that the existence of the body at every moment is [continually] 
renewed. The mind that judges the hair on the head of a human at one 
day to be identical [with the hair] that was there the previous day, [and] 
not its replica, makes the same judgment regarding the blackness of the 
hair. To this there is another difficulty—namely, that, if the enduring 
40 endures by virtue of an endurance, it follows necessarily that the divine 

Page 132: [No Text Extracted]

Page 133:
52 Discussion 2 
attributes would have to endure through an endurance, this [latter] 
endurance being [something] enduring and, hence, requiring [yet] another 
endurance, this regressing infinitely. 
(22) The fourth party is another group of Ashcarites, inasmuch as 
5 they said that the accidents cease to exist by themselves, while the sub­
stances are annihilated in that God does not create in them motion and 
rest, combination and separation. It is impossible for a body which is nei­
ther in motion nor at rest to endure, and, hence, it becomes annihilated.5 
It is as though both Ashcarite groups, inasmuch as they did not conceive 
10 nonexistence to be an act, inclined [to the view] that annihilation is not 
an act, but only the refraining from action. 
(23) If these methods [for explaining the world's annihilation] are 
false, [the philosophers argue,] then there remains no way for upholding 
the possibility of annihilating the world. 
15 (24) [They maintain] this even if it is held that the world is created. 
For, with their admission of the creation of the human soul, they claim 
the impossibility of its annihilation in a manner similar to what we have 
mentioned.6 In brief, according to them, the nonexistence after exis­
tence of anything that subsists by itself, not in a substratum, is incon-
20 ceivable, regardless of whether it is pre-eternal or temporally originated. 
And if it is said to them that, whenever one ignites fire under water, the 
water ceases to exist, they answer that it does not cease to exist but turns 
into vapor and then into water. For matter—namely, hyle—remains in 
the air, it being the matter for the form, water. It is only that the hyle has 
25 shed off the form of water and put on the form of air. If cold meets the air, 
it condenses and changes into water. It is not the case that a new water 
has come into being; rather, the materials are shared by the elements. 
It is only the [successive] turnover of their forms that changes. 
(25) [Our] answer [is as follows]: 
30 (26) Although we can defend each of the divisions you have men­
tioned, showing that their refutation on the basis of your principles is 
not sound, since your own principles include the same kind [of difficulty 
you attribute to them], we will not go into this at any length. We will 
confine ourselves to one part and say: With what [argument] would you 
35 deny someone who says: "The bringing about of existence and annihila­
tion obtains through the will of the one endowed with power. Thus, if 
God wills, He brings about existence; and, if He wills, He annihilates. 
This is the meaning of His being powerful in the [most] perfect [sense]. 

Page 134: [No Text Extracted]

Page 135:
53 Discussion 2 
In all, this He in Himself does not change, what changes being only the 
act"? As to your statement that the agent [is such] that an act inevitably 
proceeds from Him, [asking] what then proceeds from Him, we say: 
"What proceeds from Him is that which occurs anew—namely, nonexis-
5 tence—since hitherto there was no nonexistence and then nonexistence 
came about anew. This, then, is what proceeds from Him." 
(27) Should you then say, "Nonexistence is not a thing; how did it 
proceed from Him?" we answer: 
(28) It is not a thing. How, then, did it come about? The only mean-
10 ing of its proceeding from Him is that what occurs relates to His power. 
Hence, if its occurrence is apprehended by the mind, why should its rela­
tion to [His] power not be apprehended by the mind? And what is the 
difference between you and the one who utterly denies the occurrence of 
nonexistence to accidents and forms, saying, "Nonexistence is not a thing; 
15 how would it then occur and be described as occurring and coming about 
anew?" We do not doubt that the occurrence of nonexistence to accidents 
is conceivable. Hence, the coming about of what is described as occurring 
[to something] is apprehensible by the mind, regardless of whether or not 
it is called a thing. Thus, the relating of that comprehensible occurrence 
20 to the power of the one endowed with power is also comprehensible. 
(29) [To this it may be] said: 
(30) This is a necessary consequence only for the doctrine of one 
who allows the possibility of the nonexistence of a thing after its exis­
tence, where it would then be said to him, "What is it that occurred?" 
25 According to us, however, the existing thing is not annihilated. The 
meaning of the annihilation of accidents is the occurrence of their oppo-
sites, which are existents, not the occurrence of pure nonexistence, 
which is not anything. For how can one describe that which is not any­
thing as occurring? Thus, when hair turns white, the occurring thing is 
30 whiteness only, which is an existent. We do not say that what has occurred 
is the privation of blackness. 
(31) [Our answer is that] this is false in two respects: 
(32) The first [is embodied in the question]: "Does the occurrence of 
whiteness entail the privation of blackness, or does it not?" If they say, 
35 "No," they would affront what is intelligible, and if they say, "Yes," [then 
the question would be asked:] "Is what is entailed other than the thing 

Page 136: [No Text Extracted]

Page 137:
54 Discussion 2 
that entails, or identical with it?" If they say that it is identical, this 
would be contradictory, since a thing does not entail itself; and, if they 
say that it is another, then one would ask: "Is this other intelligible 
or not?" If they say, "No," then we would say: "How did you know that 
5 it is entailed, when judging it to be entailed is a recognition that it is 
intelligible?" If they say, "Yes," then [it would be asked whether] that 
which is entailed and intelligible—namely, the privation of blackness— 
is eternal or temporally originated. If they say, "Eternal," this would be 
impossible; and if they say, "Temporally originated," then how can that 
10 which is described as temporal not be intellectually apprehensible? If 
they say that it is neither eternal nor temporally originated, then this 
would be impossible. For, if it is said of blackness, prior to the occurrence 
of whiteness, that it did not exist, this would be false; and, if after [the 
occurrence of whiteness] it is said that [blackness] is nonexistent, this 
15 would be true. It is, hence, inescapably an occurrence. Such an occurrence 
is thus intellectually apprehensible, and, hence, it is permissible for it to 
be related to the power of one endowed with power. 
(33) The second respect [in which their argument is false] is that there 
are accidents that, according to them, cease to exist, not through [the 
20 occurrence of] their opposite. For motion has no opposite, the opposition 
between it and rest, according to them, being that of the opposition 
between [what is] a positive disposition and privation—that is, the oppo­
sition between existence and nonexistence. The meaning of rest is the 
absence of motion, so that, if motion ceases, there is no occurrence of a 
25 rest which is its opposite, [rest] being pure nonexistence. The same is true 
of those qualities that pertain to the class of the realization of perfections, 
as, for example, the imprinting of images of sensible things in the moist 
humor of the eye—nay, the impression of the forms of the intelligibles in 
the soul. For these amount to the commencement of an existence without 
30 the ceasing to exist of its opposite. If these are annihilated, this means the 
ceasing of existence without its being followed by its opposite. Their ceas­
ing to exist then represents a pure privation that has occurred. Hence, 
the coming about of the occurring privation is apprehended intellectu­
ally. And, [in the case of] that whose occurrence as such (even though 
35 not a thing) is apprehended intellectually, its relation to the power of the 
one endowed with power becomes [likewise] apprehended intellectually. 
(34) Through [all] this it becomes clear that, so long as the occur­
rence of an event by an eternal will is conceivable, there is no difference 
in the state of affairs whether what occurs is a privation or an existence. 

Page 138: [No Text Extracted]

Page 139:
[Third] Discussion 
On showing their obfuscation in saying that 
God is the world's enactor and maker, 
that the world is His handiwork and act; showing 
that with them this is metaphor, not reality 
(1) The philosophers, with the exception of the materialists, have 
agreed that the world has a maker, that God is the maker and enactor 
of the world, that the world is His act and handiwork. This, however, 
is obfuscation in terms of their principle. Indeed, it is inconceivable, in 
5 accordance with their principle, for the world to be the work of God, 
in three respects: with respect to the agent, with respect to the act, and 
with respect to a relationship common to act and agent. 
(2) Regarding [the aspect pertaining to] the agent, it is incumbent 
thai He should be a wilier, a chooser, and a knower of what He wills, so 
10 as to be the agent of what He wills. But, according to [the philosophers], 
God, exalted be He, is not one who wills, but has no attribute at all. What­
ever proceeds from Him proceeds by compulsory necessity. [As lor] the 
second [aspect, which pertains to the act], the world [for the philosophers] 
is eternal, whereas the act is the temporally originated. [Regarding] the 
15 third [aspect], God for them is one in every respect; and from the One, 
according to them, nothing but that which is one in all respects proceeds. 
But the world is composed of various [things]; how does it then proceed 
from Him? 
(3) Let us, then, ascertain each one of these three aspects, together 
20 with [showing] their insanity in defending it. 
-55-

Page 140: [No Text Extracted]

Page 141:
56 Discussion 3 
Regarding the first [aspect] 
(4) We say: " 'Agent' is an expression [referring] to one from whom 
the act proceeds, together with the will to act by way of choice and the 
knowledge of what is willed." But, according to you [philosophers], the 
world [proceeds] from God [exalted be He] as the effect from the cause, 
5 as a necessary consequence, inconceivable for God to prevent, in the way 
the shadow is the necessary consequence of the individual and light [the 
necessary consequence] of the sun. And this does not pertain to action in 
anything. Indeed, whoever says that the lamp enacts the light and the 
individual enacts the shadow has ventured excessively into metaphor 
10 and stretched it beyond [its] bound, being satisfied with the occurrence 
of one common description between the expression borrowed for one 
thing and that from which it is borrowed, [as in this instance, where] the 
agent is cause in a general sense, whereas the lamp is the cause of illu­
mination and the sun the cause of light. The agent, however, is not called 
15 an agent and a maker by simply being a cause, but by being a cause in a 
special respect—namely, by way of will and choice—so that if one were 
to say, "The wall is not an agent; the stone is not an agent; the inani­
mate is not an agent, action being confined to animals," this would not be 
denied and the statement would not be false. But [according to the 
20 philosophers] the stone has an action—namely, falling due to heaviness 
and an inclination toward [the earth's] center—just as fire has an action, 
which is heating, and the wall has an action—namely, the inclination 
toward the center and the occurrence of the shadow—for all [these latter 
things] proceed from [the wall]. But this is impossible. 
25 (5) [The philosophers, however, may] say: 
(6) [In the case of] every existent whose existence is not in itself 
necessary, but which exists through another, we call that thing an 
enacted thing and its cause an agent. We do not care whether the cause 
acts by nature or voluntarily, just as you do not care whether it acts by an 
30 instrument or without an instrument. Rather, [for you] action is a genus 
that divides into that which occurs through an instrument and that which 
occurs without an instrument. Similarly, it is a genus and divides into that 
which occurs naturally and that which occurs by choice. Proof of this is 

Page 142: [No Text Extracted]

Page 143:
57 Discussion 3 
that, if we say, "He acted by nature," our saying "by nature" would not 
be contrary to our saying "he acted," neither repelling nor contradicting 
it. Rather, it would be a clarification of the kind of action, just as, when 
we say, "He acted directly, without an instrument," this would not be a 
5 contradiction, but an indication of [the] kind [of action] and a clarifi­
cation. If we say, "He acted by choice," this would not be repetition as 
[when we repeat ourselves] in our statement, "animal, human," but an 
explication of the kind of action, as [in] our statement, "He acted 
[using] an instrument." Had our statement, "He acted," entailed will, 
10 will being essential to the action inasmuch as it is action, then our state­
ment, "He acted by nature," would be [as] contradictory as our statement, 
"He acted and he has not acted." 
(7) We say: 
(8) This naming is false. It is not permissible to call any cause, in 
15 whatever aspect, an agent, nor any effect an enacted thing. Had this 
been the case, it would not then be correct to say that the inanimate has 
no action, action belonging only to animals, when these are among the 
well-known, true universals. If the inanimate is called an agent, then this 
is as metaphor, just as it is called a seeker and wilier by way of figurative 
20 speech. For it is said that the stone falls because it wills [to move to] the 
center and seeks it, when seeking and willing in reality are only conceiv­
able in conjunction with the knowledge of what is willed and sought after 
and are [thus] conceivable only of animals. 
(9) As for your statement that our saying, "He acts," is a general state-
25 ment and divides into what is by nature and what is by will, this is not 
admitted. It is akin to someone saying that our statement, "He willed," is a 
general expression and divides [in its reference] into one who wills and 
knows what he wills and one who wills and does not know what he wills. 
And this is false, since will necessarily entails knowledge. Similarly, action 
30 necessarily entails will. Regarding your statement that [the second part 
of] our saying, "He acted by nature," does not contradict the first, this is 
not the case. For it contradicts it in terms of what is real. But the contra­
diction does not impress itself immediately on the understanding, and 
[our] nature's repulsion to it does not become intense because it remains 
35 a metaphor. For, since it is in some respect a cause, the agent also being a 
cause, ["the action by nature"] is called an action metaphorically. If one 

Page 144: [No Text Extracted]

Page 145:
58 Discussion 3 
says, "He acted by choice," this is ascertainable as repetition, as when 
one says, "He willed, knowing what he willed." But, since it is conceivable 
to say "he acted" when this is metaphor and "he acted" when this is real, 
the soul is not repelled by the statement, "He acted by choice," the 
5 meaning being that he performed a real action not [in the] metaphorical 
[sense], as when one says [in the real sense], "He spoke with his tongue," 
or, "He saw with his eye." For, since it is [linguistically] permissible to 
use [the expression] "seeing with the heart" metaphorically and "speak­
ing" with reference to one's moving the head and the hand, such that one 
10 would say, "He spoke with his head," meaning [that he said], "Yes," it is 
not deemed repugnant to say, "He spoke with his tongue" and "saw with 
his eye," where the intention is to remove the possibility of [taking these 
expressions as] metaphor. This, then, is where the foot will slip. Let one 
then be alerted to [the place] where these naive people are deceived. 
15 (10) [The philosophers may] say: 
(11) Naming the agent "agent" is known from linguistic usage. Other­
wise, it is evident to the mind that what is a cause for a thing divides 
into that which is voluntary and that which is not. The dispute, hence, 
pertains to whether or not the term "action" is truly applicable to both 
20 divisions. There is no way to deny [its applicability to both], since the 
Arabs say, "Fire burns," "The sword cuts," "Snow cools," "Scammony 
moves the bowels," "Bread satiates," and "Water quenches." Our saying, 
"He strikes," means, "He enacts the striking"; our saying, "It burns," 
means, "It enacts the burning"; and our saying, "It cuts," means, "It 
25 enacts the cutting." If you say, "All of this is metaphor," you would be 
arbitrary about it, without support. 
(12) [To this we] answer: 
(13) All this is by way of metaphor. Real action is that which comes 
about only through will. Proof of this is that, if we suppose that a temporal 
30 event depends for its occurrence on two things, one voluntary and the other 
not, reason relates the act to the voluntary. [It is] the same with language. 
For, if someone throws another into the fire and [the latter] dies, it is said 
that [the former], not the fire, is the killer, so that if it is said, "None 

Page 146: [No Text Extracted]

Page 147:
59 Discussion 3 
other than So-and-so killed him," the speaker of this would have said the 
truth. For if the term "agent" is [applicable to both] wilier and nonwiller 
in the same way, not by way of one of them being the basis [and] the 
other derived as a metaphor from it, why is it, then, that, on the basis of 
5 language, custom, and reason, killing is related to the wilier, even though 
fire is the proximate cause of the killing? [Here the opponent is speak­
ing] as though the one who throws [the victim] would have only under­
taken bringing [the victim] and the fire together. But, since the joining 
[of victim and fire] came about through will, whereas the efficacy of fire 
10 is without will, [the wilier] is called the killer and the fire is not called a 
killer except through some kind of metaphor. This shows that the agent 
is the one from whom the act proceeds through his will. Hence, if God, 
according to [the philosophers], has neither will nor choice, He would be 
neither an agent nor a maker except in a metaphorical [sense]. 
15 (14) [The philosophers may] say: 
(15) We mean by God's being an agent that He is the cause of every 
other existent; and that the world's subsistence is through Him; and 
that, had it not been for the existence of the Creator, the existence of the 
world would be inconceivable. And, should the nonexistence of God be 
20 supposed, then [in terms of such a supposition] the world would cease to 
exist—just as, if the nonexistence of the sun is supposed, light [in terms 
of such a supposition] would cease to exist. This is what we mean by His 
being an agent. If the opponent refuses to call this meaning "action," 
there is no need to squabble about names, once the meaning is clear. 
25 (16) We say: 
(17) Our [whole] purpose is to show that this meaning is not [properly] 
termed "action" and "handiwork." Rather, that which is meant by "action" 
and "handiwork" is that which truly proceeds from the will. You [philoso­
phers] have denied the true meaning of "action" and have uttered its 
30 expression to endear yourselves to Muslims. Religion is not fulfilled by 
uttering expressions devoid of [their real] meaning. Declare openly, then, 
that God has no action, so that it becomes clear that your belief is con­
trary to the religion of Muslims. Do not confuse matters by [stating] that 
God is the maker of the world and that the world is His doing. For this is 

Page 148: [No Text Extracted]

Page 149:
60 Discussion 3 
an expression which you have uttered, but [you have] denied its reality. 
The purpose of this discussion is only to clear this deceptive beclouding. 
The second aspect 
(18) [This is] concerned with refuting [the idea] that the world, 
according to their principle, is the act of God. [The refutation] pertains 
J to a condition regarding the act—namely, that the act means temporal 
creation, whereas the world, according to them, is pre-eternal and not 
temporally created. The meaning of "action" is the bringing forth of the 
thing from nonexistence to existence by creating it. But this is inconceiv­
able of the pre-eternal, since what [already] exists cannot be brought 
10 into existence. Hence, the condition of the act [to be something enacted] 
is for it to be temporally created. But the world, according to [the philoso­
phers], is pre-eternal. How could it, then, be the act of God? 
(19) [The philosophers] may say:1 
(20) The meaning of "the created" is "an existent after nonexistence." 
15 Let us, then, investigate the case when the agent creates: is that which 
proceeds from Him, that relates to Him, pure existence, pure nonexist­
ence, or both? It is false to say that what relates to Him is the prior 
nonexistence, since the agent has no influence on nonexistence. And it is 
false to say that both [relate to Him], since it has become clear that non-
20 existence basically does not relate to Him and that nonexistence, in being 
nonexistence, does not require an agent at all. It remains, then, that it 
relates to Him inasmuch as it exists and that what proceeds from Him is 
pure existence and that there is no relation to Him except existence. If 
existence is supposed to be permanent, the relation would be supposed 
25 permanent. And if the relation is permanent, then the one to whom it 
relates would be the more efficacious and more permanent in influence 
because nonexistence did not attach to the agent in any state. It [then] 
remains to say that [the world] relates to [the agent] inasmuch as it is 
created. There is no meaning for its being created except that it exists 
30 after nonexistence but that nonexistence is not related to it. If, then, the 

Page 150: [No Text Extracted]

Page 151:
61 Discussion 3 
precedence of nonexistence is made a description of existence and it is 
said that what relates [to the agent] is a special [kind of] existence, not all 
existence—namely, existence preceded by nonexistence—it would be said: 
(21) Its being preceded by nonexistence is not an act of an agent and 
5 the work of a maker. For the proceeding of this existence from its agent 
is only conceivable with nonexistence preceding it. But the precedence 
of nonexistence is not the enactment of the agent—thus, its being pre­
ceded by nonexistence is not through the act of the agent. It thus has no 
connection with it. Hence, having [the previous nonexistence] as a con-
10 dition for [the act] to be an act is to set as a condition that over which 
the agent in no circumstance has any influence. As for your statement 
that the existent cannot be brought into existence, if you mean by this 
that an existence does not commence for it after nonexistence, this 
would be correct. If [on the other hand] you mean by this that in the 
15 state of its being existent it would not be [something] brought into exis­
tence, we have shown that it is [something] brought into existence in the 
state of its being existent, not in the state of its being nonexistent. For a 
thing is only brought into existence if the agent brings about existence; 
and the agent is not an enactor of existence in a state of [a thing's] 
20 nonexistence, but in the state of a thing's [being in] existence [due to 
it]. Bringing into existence is concomitant with the agent's being that 
which brings about existence and the thing enacted being that which is 
brought into existence. [This is] because it is an expression of the rela­
tion of the thing that brings about existence to the thing whose exis-
25 tence is brought about. All [this obtains] with existence, not before it. 
Hence, there is no bringing about of existence except for an existent, if 
by "bringing into existence" is meant the relation through which the 
agent is that which brings about existence and the thing enacted that 
which is brought into existence. 
30 (22) [The philosophers] say [further]: 
(23) For this reason we have ruled that the world is the act of God 
from eternity and everlastingly and that there is no time wherein He is 
not the Enactor of it. For what is connected with the agent is existence. 
Hence, if the connection continues, existence continues; and if it is 
35 severed, [existence] is severed. It is not what you [theologians] imagine— 
namely, that, if one supposes the Creator's existence to cease, the world 
would [still] endure, since you have thought Him to be akin to the builder 
[in relation to] the building. For [the builder] would cease to exist, whereas 
the building would remain. The continued endurance of the building is 
I 

Page 152: [No Text Extracted]

Page 153:
62 Discussion 3 
not due to the builder, but to the dryness that holds its structure together, 
since, if it did not have the sustaining power—like water, for example, 
does not—the endurance of the original shape brought about by the act 
of the agent would be inconceivable.2 
5 (24) [To this we] answer: 
(25) The act attaches to the agent in terms of its temporal origina­
tion, not in terms of its previous nonexistence, nor in terms of its being 
an existent only. For, according to us, it does not attach to it in the sub­
sequent state after origination when it [already] exists, but attaches to 
10 it at the moment of its temporal origination, inasmuch as [this] is tem­
poral origination and an exodus from nonexistence to existence. If the 
meaning of temporal existence is denied it, then neither its being an act 
nor its being attached to an agent would be intelligible. Your statement 
that its being temporally originated reduces to its being preceded by 
15 nonexistence and [that] its being preceded by nonexistence is not the act 
of the agent and the deed of the maker [expresses what, in fact,] is the 
case. But its being preceded by nonexistence is a condition for existence 
to be the act of the agent. Thus, existence which is not preceded by 
nonexistence, but is perpetual, is not fit to be the act of the agent. Not 
20 everything that is made a condition for the act to be an act should [come 
about] through the act of the agent. Thus, the agent's essence, his power, 
his will, and his knowledge are a condition for his being [an agent]. But 
this is not the effect of the agent. But one cannot comprehend an act 
unless [it proceeds] from an existent. Hence, the agent's existence, his 
25 will, his power, and his knowledge [constitute] a condition for his being 
an agent, although these are not the effects of the agent. 
(26) [To this the philosophers may] say: 
(27) If you have acknowledged the possibility of the act's coexistence 
with the agent [rather than] its being posterior to him, then it follows 
30 necessarily from this that the act would be temporally originated if the 
agent is temporally originated, and [the act would be] pre-eternal if [the 
agent] is pre-eternal. If you make it a condition that the act should be 
temporally posterior to the agent, this would be impossible, since, if 
someone moves his hand in a glass of water, the water moves with the 
35 movement of the hand, neither before nor after it. For if it moved after it, 

Page 154: [No Text Extracted]

Page 155:
63 Discussion 3 
then, before [the water] gives way, the hand would be with the water in 
one and the same space; and if it moved before it, then the water would be 
separated from the hand—this with its being [simultaneous] with it [as] 
its effect and an act proceeding from its direction. If, then, we suppose 
5 the hand to be pre-eternal in the water, [ever] moving, then the move­
ment of the water would also be perpetual, being, despite its perpetuity, 
an effect and an enacted thing. This [latter] is not prevented by suppos­
ing perpetuity. The case is similar with the relation of the world to God. 
(28) [To this] we say: 
10 (29) We do not deem it impossible that the act [should coexist] with 
the agent, [provided that] the act is created, as with the movement of 
the water. For it is created out of nonexistence. It is, hence, possible [for 
something] to be an act, regardless of whether it is posterior to the essence 
of the agent or concomitant with it. We only deem impossible the eternal 
15 act. For naming that which is not created out of nothing an "act" is pure 
metaphor, having no reality. As regards the effect with the cause, it is 
possible for both to be created or to be eternal, as [when] it is said that 
eternal knowledge is a cause for the Eternal to be a knower. This is not 
what is being discussed. The discussion is only concerned with what is 
20 termed an "act." The effect of the cause is not called an act of the cause 
except metaphorically. Rather, what is called an act has as a condition its 
being created out of nothing. If someone allows himself to call the Eternal, 
the Permanently Existent, an3 act of another, he would be indulging in 
metaphor. Your statement, "If we suppose the movement of the finger 
25 and the finger to be eternal, this would not remove the movement of the 
water from being an act," is obfuscation. This is because the finger has no 
act; rather, the agent is only the one who has the finger, and he is the one 
who wills [the act]. If we suppose him to be eternal, the movement of the 
finger would [still] be an act of his, inasmuch as each part of the move-
30 ment is a temporal creation out of nothing. Considered in this way, it 
would be an act. As for the movement of the water, we might not say that 
it is a result of his action, but of the action of God. But in whatever way 
we take [the water's movement in the supposition to be caused], it is an 
act inasmuch as it is created, except that it is eternally being created— 
35 it being an act inasmuch as it is created. 
(30) [The philosophers] may say: 

Page 156: [No Text Extracted]

Page 157:
64 Discussion 3 
(31) You have, hence, acknowledged that the relation of the act to the 
agent, inasmuch as it exists, is akin to the relation of the effect to the 
cause, and then admitted that the permanence of the relation between 
cause [and effect] is conceivable. We do not mean by the world's being an 
5 "act" anything other than its being an effect whose relation to God, 
exalted be He, is permanent. If you do not call this an "act," there is no 
need for conflict over naming once the meanings are clear. 
(32) We say: 
(33) Our sole purpose in this question is to show that you have used 
10 these terms as an affectation, without [the proper] ascertaining of their 
real meaning; that God, according to you, is not an agent in the real 
sense nor the world His act in a real sense; and that the application of 
such a term on your part is metaphorical, having no basis in reality. And 
this has become manifest. 
The third aspect 
15 (34) [This is concerned with showing] the impossibility of the 
world's being an act of God according to their principle, due to a condi­
tion common to agent and act—namely, in that they said, "From the one 
only one thing proceeds." But the First Principle [they hold] is one in 
every respect. The world, however, is composed of varied things. Hence, 
20 as necessarily demanded by their own principle, it is inconceivable for it 
to be an act of God. 
(35) [The philosophers] may say: 
(36) The world as a whole does not proceed from God without an 
intermediary. Rather, what proceeds from Him is one existent which is 
25 the first of the created things. It is a pure intellect—that is, it is a sub­
stance that is self-subsisting; that has no position in space; that knows 
itself and knows its principle; and, in the language of the revealed law, is 
referred to as an "angel." A third existent proceeds from it and from 
the third a fourth, the existents becoming multiple through mediation. 
30 For the variance in the act and its multiplicity are due either: [(a)] to the 
differences in the acting powers—just as we enact with the appetitive 

Page 158: [No Text Extracted]

Page 159:
65 Discussion 3 
power that which is different from what we enact with irascible power; 
[(b)] to the different materials—just as the sun whitens the washed gar­
ments, darkens the face of man, melts some substances, and solidifies 
some; [(c)] to differences in the instruments [used]—as with the one 
5 carpenter who saws with the saw, chisels with the adz, and bores holes 
with the drill; or [(d)] the multiplicity in the act comes about through 
mediation where one act is performed, then that act enacts another, the 
act thereby becoming multiple. 
(37) All these divisions are impossible with respect to the First Prin-
10 ciple, since there is neither difference, nor duality, nor multiplicity in His 
essence, as will be shown in the proofs of divine unity. Moreover, there is no 
difference in materials. For the discussion would [then] pertain to the first 
effect and that which is first matter, for example.4 And, moreover, there 
is no difference in instrument, since there is no existent having the same 
15 rank as God. The discussion would then pertain [only] to the origination 
of the first instrument. Thus, there only remains for the multiplicity in the 
world to proceed from God by way of mediation, as mentioned earlier. 
(38) We say: 
(39) It follows necessarily from this that there will be no one thing in 
20 the world that is composed of individuals. Rather, all the existents would 
be ones, each one the effect of another one above it and the cause of 
another below it, until an effect without an effect is reached, just as [this 
chain] terminates in the direction of ascent with a cause that has no 
cause. But this is not the case. For body, according to them, is composed 
25 of form and matter, becoming by their combination one thing. [Again,] 
man is composed of body and soul, the existence of neither being from 
the other, the existence of both being through another cause. The heav­
enly sphere, according to them, is likewise. For it is a body with a soul 
where neither is the soul caused by the body nor the body by the soul, 
30 both proceeding from a cause other than both. How, then, did these com­
posites come into existence? [Did they come about] from one [simple] 
cause—in which case their statement that from the one only one pro­
ceeds becomes false—or from a composite cause? [If the latter,] then the 

Page 160: [No Text Extracted]

Page 161:
66 Discussion 3 
question becomes directed to the composition of the cause [and is pur­
sued] until one arrives at [the conclusion that] a composite necessarily 
meets a simple. For the principle is simple, whereas in [all] other [things] 
there is composition. This is inconceivable unless [the simple and the com-
5 plex] meet; and, inasmuch as a meeting takes place, [the philosophers'] 
statement that from the one only one proceeds becomes false. 
(40) [The philosophers may] say: 
(41) Once our doctrine is [properly] known, the difficulty is resolved. 
Existents divide into those that are in receptacles, such as accidents and 
10 forms, and those that are not in receptacles. These [latter] divide into 
those, like bodies, that are receptacles for others and those that are not 
receptacles, such as the existents that are self-subsisting substances. 
These [in turn] divide into those that exert influence on bodies—and 
these we call souls—and those that do not exert influence on bodies, but 
15 only on souls, which we call pure intellects. As for the existents, such as 
accidents, that indwell in receptacles, these are temporal and have tem­
poral causes that terminate in a principle that is in one respect temporal 
and in one respect permanent—namely, the circular [celestial] motion, 
which, however, is not the object of the discussion. The discussion is only 
20 concerned with the principles that are self-subsistent that do not [inhere] 
in receptacles. These are three: [(1)] bodies, which are the lowliest; 
|(2)] pure intellects that do not relate to bodies, either through the rela­
tion of action or by being impressed [in them], these being the noblest; 
[(3)] souls, which hold the middle ground. For these [souls] attach to 
25 bodies in some manner of attachment—namely, the exertion of influ­
ence and action on them. They are, hence, medial in the rank of value. 
For they are influenced by the intellects and exert influence on bodies. 
(42) Moreover, the bodies are ten: nine heavens and a tenth which 
[consists of] the matter which is the filling of the concavity of the sphere 
30 of the moon. The nine heavens are animals that have bodies and souls 
and have an order in existence, which we will [now] mention. 

Page 162: [No Text Extracted]

Page 163:
67 Discussion 3 
(43) From the existence of the First Principle the first intellect 
emanated, it being a self-subsisting existent, neither body nor imprinted 
in body, that knows itself and knows its principle. (We have named it 
"the first intellect," but there is no need for dispute about names— 
5 whether it is called "angel," "intellect," or whatever one wishes). From its 
existence three things are rendered necessary: an intellect; the soul of 
the most distant [that is, the outermost] sphere, which is the ninth 
heaven; and the body of the most distant sphere. Then, from the second 
intellect, there necessarily [comes into existence] a third intellect: the 
10 soul of the sphere of the [fixed] stars, and its body. Then, from the third 
intellect there necessarily [proceeds] a fourth intellect: the soul of Sat­
urn and its body. From the fourth intellect there necessarily [comes into 
existence] a fifth intellect: the soul of the sphere of Jupiter and its body. 
[The process continues] in this manner until it reaches the intellect 
15 from which proceeds [the existence] of the [last] intellect: the soul of 
the sphere of the moon and its body. The last intellect is the one termed 
"the active intellect." That which fills the sphere of the moon—namely, 
matter subject to generation and corruption—[proceeds] necessarily 
from the active intellect and the natures of the spheres. The matters 
20 intermix due to the motion of the stars in various combinations from 
which the minerals, plants, and animals come about. It does not follow 
necessarily that from each intellect another intellect would ensue with­
out end. For these intellects are of different species,5 so that what holds 
for one does not necessarily hold for the other. 
25 (44) From [all] this, it comes out that the intellects, after the First 
Principle, are ten in number, and the spheres nine. The sum of these 
noble principles, after the First [Principle], is nineteen. From this it [also] 
comes out that under each of the first intellects there are three things: 
an intellect, the soul of a sphere, and its body. Hence, there must neces-
30 sarily be a trinity in the principle [of each of these intellects]. No multi­
plicity is conceivable in the first effect except in one respect—namely, in 
that it intellectually apprehends its principle and intellectually appre­
hends itself. [Now,] with respect to itself, it is [only] possible of existence 
because the necessity of its existence is through another, not itself. These, 
35 then, are three different meanings, and the noblest of the three effects 

Page 164: [No Text Extracted]

Page 165:
68 Discussion 3 
ought to be related to the noblest of these meanings. Thus, an intellect 
proceeds from it inasmuch as it intellectually apprehends its principle. 
The soul of the sphere proceeds from it inasmuch as it intellectually appre­
hends itself, whereas the body of the sphere proceeds from it inasmuch 
5 as it in itself is [only] possible of existence. 
(45) It remains [for the opponent] to say, "Whence did this trinity in 
the first effect come about when its principle is one?" We say: 
(46) Nothing proceeded from the First Principle except one [thing]: 
namely, the essence of this intellect by which it apprehends itself intel-
10 lectually. It has as a necessary consequence—not, however, from the direc­
tion of the Principle—that it apprehends the Principle intellectually.6 In 
itself it is possible of existence; but it does not derive [this] possibility from 
the First Principle, but [has it] due to itself. We do not deem it improba­
ble that, from the one, one comes into existence, where the [latter] effect 
15 would have as a necessary concomitant—[but] not from the direction of 
the First Principle—necessary matters, relative or non-relative, because of 
which multiplicity comes about, [this effect] becoming thereby the princi­
ple for the existence of plurality. In this manner, then, it becomes possible 
for the composite to meet the simple, since such a meeting is inevitable; 
20 and it can only happen in this way. This, then, is the way the [matter] 
must be adjudged. This, then, is the discourse explaining their doctrine. 
(47) [To this] we say: 
(48) What you have mentioned are arbitrary assertions which, when 
truly ascertained, constitute [nothing but] darkness atop darkness. If a 
25 human were to relate this as something seen in sleep, one would infer 
from it the illness of his temperament; or, if its kind were brought about 
in legal matters, where the most one can hope for is conjecture, it would 
be said that these are trifles that bestow no likely suppositions. The 
[possible] openings in objecting to such [statements] are limitless. We 
30 will, however, bring forth aspects that are limited in number. 
(49) The first is to say: "You have claimed that one of the meanings of 
plurality in the first effect is that it is possible of existence." [To this we] 
say: "Is its being possible of existence identical with its existence or other 
than it? If identical, then no plurality would arise from it; and, if other than 
35 it, then why would you not say that there is plurality in the First Principle 
because He exists and, in addition to this, He is necessary of existence?" 
For the necessity of existence is other than existence itself. Let one then 

Page 166: [No Text Extracted]

Page 167:
69 Discussion 3 
allow the proceeding of various things from Him due to this plurality. If 
it is said, "There is no meaning to the necessary of existence except exis­
tence," then [we would say that] there is no meaning to the possibility of 
existence except existence. If you then say, "It is possible to know its being 
5 an existent without knowing its being possible; hence, [being possible] is 
other than it," [we would say that,] similarly with the Necessary Existent, 
it is possible to know His existence without knowing its necessity except 
after another proof; hence, let [the necessity] be other than Him. 
(50) In sum, existence is a general thing that divides into the neces-
10 sary and the contingent. If, then, the differentia in one of the two divisions 
is additional to the general [meaning], the same applies to the second 
differentia. There is no difference [between the two]. 
(51) If it is then said, "The possibility of existence belongs to it from 
itself, whereas its existence derives from another; then how would that 
15 which belongs to it from itself and that which it has from another be the 
same?" we say: 
(52) How can the necessity of existence be identical with existence, 
when the necessity of existence can be denied and existence affirmed?7 
The true one" in every respect is the one not subject to [simultaneous] 
20 affirmation and negation, since it cannot be said of it that it exists and 
does not exist and that it is necessary of existence and not necessary of 
existence. But it is possible to say that [something] exists but is not 
necessary of existence, just as it can be said that it exists and is not pos­
sible of existence. It is through this that unity is known. Hence, it would 
25 be incorrect to suppose this [identity of the necessity of existence and 
existence] in the case of the First, if what they say—namely, that the 
possibility of existence is other than existence that is possible—is true. 
(53) The second objection is to say: "Is [the first intellect's] intel­
lectual apprehension of its Principle identical with its existence and 
30 identical with its apprehension of itself, or is it another?" If identical, 
then there is no plurality in its essence—only in the verbal expression 
about its essence. If another, then this plurality exists in the First. For 
He intellectually apprehends His essence and intellectually apprehends 
[what is] other. If they claim [(a)] that His intellectual apprehension of 
35 Himself is His very self, [(b)] that He only apprehends Himself if He 
apprehends that He is a principle for another, [and (c)] that [this is] 
because the act of intellectual apprehension9 coincides with the appre­
hended intelligible, whereby [His apprehending another] reverts to 
[being] His [very] essence, we say: 

Page 168: [No Text Extracted]

Page 169:
70 Discussion 3 
(54) The [first] effect's intellectual apprehension of itself is identical 
with itself. For it is intellect in its substance, and thus it intellectually 
apprehends itself. Intellect, that which intellectually apprehends, and 
that of it which is intellectually apprehended are also one. Moreover, if 
5 its intellectual apprehension of itself is identical with itself, then let it 
apprehend itself as an effect of a cause. For this is the case. Intellect and 
intelligible coincide, all thus reverting to the essence [of the first effect]. 
Hence, there is no multiplicity. If this were to constitute plurality, then it 
would exist in the First. Let, then, the varied things proceed from Him. 
10 And let us then forsake the claim of His unity in every respect, if unity 
ceases with this kind of plurality. 
(55) If it is then said, "The First does not apprehend intellectually 
[that which is] other than Himself. His intellectual apprehension of 
Himself is identical with Himself, intellect, intellectual apprehension, 
15 and what is apprehended being one [and the same]; and [thus] He does 
not intellectually apprehend another," we answer in two ways: 
(56) One is that because of the repugnancy of this doctrine Avicenna 
and the rest of the exacting [philosophers] abandoned it. They claimed 
that the First knows Himself as the source for what emanates from Him 
20 and intellectually apprehends all the existents in their [various] kinds by 
a universal, not particular, intellectual apprehension, since they deemed 
it reprehensible for one to say that from the First Principle only an intel­
lect proceeds and then that He does not intellectually apprehend what 
proceeds from Him. And His effect [those who hold that the First knows 
25 only Himself then maintain]10 is an intellect from which another intellect, 
the soul of a sphere, and a body of a sphere emanate. [This other intel­
lect] apprehends itself, its three effects, its [own] cause, and its principle. 
(57) The effect [it should be pointed out] would thus be nobler than 
the cause, inasmuch as from the cause only one [existent] emanated, 
30 whereas from this one three emanated. Moreover, the First apprehends 
intellectually only Himself, whereas this [effect] apprehends itself, the 
Principle itself, and the effects themselves. Whoever is content [with 
holding] that what he says about God reduces to this level would have 
rendered Him lower than every existent that apprehends itself and Him. 
35 For that which apprehends Him and apprehends itself is nobler than He, 
since He apprehends only Himself. 
(58) Hence, their endeavor to go deep into magnifying [God] has 
ended up in their negating everything that is understood by greatness. 
They have rendered His state approximating that of the dead person who 

Page 170: [No Text Extracted]

Page 171:
71 Discussion 3 
has no information of what takes place in the world, differing from the 
dead, however, only in His self-awareness. This is what God does with those 
who are deviators from His path and destroyers of the way of guidance; 
who deny His saying, "I did not make them witness the creation of the 
5 heavens and the earth, nor the creation of themselves" [Qur'an 18:51]; 
who think of God in evil terms; who believe that the depth of the "lordly" 
things is grasped by the human faculties; who are full of conceit about 
their minds, claiming that they have in them a [better] alternative to the 
tradition of imitating the apostles and following them. No wonder, then, 
10 that they are forced to acknowledge that the substance of their intellec­
tual apprehensions reduces to that which would be astonishing [even] if 
it were uttered in a slumber. 
(59) The second answer is that whoever upholds that the First intellec­
tually apprehends only Himself | has done so] to avoid plurality as a necessary 
15 consequence. For, if he were to uphold [the doctrine that He knows other 
than Himself], then it would follow necessarily that one must say that His 
apprehending another is other than His apprehending Himself. But this 
is [also] necessary with the first effect, and, hence, it ought to apprehend 
| nothing] but itself. For, if it apprehends the First or another, then this act 
20 of intellectual apprehension would be other than itself; and it would require 
a cause other than the cause of itself when there is no cause other than the 
cause of itself—namely, the First Principle. Hence, it ought to know only it­
self, and the plurality that ensues in (the] way [the philosophers hold] ceases. 
(60) If it is said, "When it came into existence and apprehended itself, 
25 it became necessary for it to apprehend the Principle," we say: 
(61) Did this become necessary for it by a cause or without a cause? 
If by a cause, there is no cause except the First Principle. He is one, and it 
is inconceivable that anything but one should proceed from Him. And this 
[one thing] has [already] proceeded—namely, the effect. How, then, did the 
30 second [thing, the necessity of the first effect to apprehend Him,] proceed 
from Him:' If [on the other hand] it became necessary without a cause, let, 
then, the existence of the First [Principle] be followed necessarily by nu­
merous existents without a cause, and let plurality be their resultant con­
sequence. If this is incomprehensible—inasmuch as necessary existence 
35 cannot be but one, that which is more than one being [only] possible, the 
possible requiring a cause—then this thing which is necessary in terms 
of the [first] effect [—namely, that it must apprehend the First Principle— 
would have to be either necessary in itself or possible]. But if [it is] necessary 
in itself, then [the philosophers'] statement that the Necessary Existent is 
40 one becomes false. If possible, then it must require a cause. But it has no 

Page 172: [No Text Extracted]

Page 173:
72 Discussion 3 
cause. Its existence is, hence, incomprehensible. Nor is [this necessity of 
apprehending the First] a necessity [required] by the first effect by rea­
son of its being possible of existence. For the possibility of existence is 
necessary in every effect. As for an effect's having knowledge of its cause, 
5 this is not necessary for its existence, just as the cause's being cognizant 
of its effect is not necessary for its existence. Rather, the concomitance 
[of a cause] and the knowledge of [its] effect is more evident than the 
concomitance [of an effect] and the knowledge of [its] cause. It becomes 
clear, then, that the plurality resulting from [the first effect's] knowledge 
10 of its principle is impossible. For there is no initiating principle for this 
[knowledge], and it is not a necessary consequence of the existence of 
I he effect itself. This also is inescapable. 
(62) The third objection is [to ask]: "Is the first effect's intellectual 
apprehension of its own essence identical with its essence or other than 
15 it?" If it is identical, this would be impossible, because knowledge is other 
I han the object known. If it is other, then let this be the same with the First 
Principle: plurality would then necessarily ensue from Him. Moreover, 
I here would necessarily proceed from [the first effect] a quadruplication 
and not, as they claim, a trinity [of existents]. For this would consist of 
20 [the first effect] itself, its apprehension of itself, its apprehension of its 
Principle, and its being in itself possible of existence. One could also add 
that it is necessary of existence through another, wherewith a quintupli-
cating would appear. By this one gets to know the deep delving of these 
[philosophers] into lunacy. 
25 (63) The fourth objection is for us to say: "Trinity in the first effect 
does not suffice." For the body of the first heaven, according to them, pro­
ceeds necessarily from one idea in the essence of [its] principle. [But] in 
it there is composition in three respects. 
(64) One of them is that it is composed of form and matter—this, 
30 according to them, being applicable to every body. It is incumbent, then, 
that each of the two should have a [different] principle, since form differs 
from matter. Neither one of them, according to their doctrine, is an inde­
pendent cause of the other, whereby one of them would come about 
through the mediation of the other without another additional cause. 
35 (65) The second is that the outermost body is of a specific extent in 
size. Its having this specific quantity from among the rest of quantities 
is something additional to the existence of itself, since it can be smaller 

Page 174: [No Text Extracted]

Page 175:
73 Discussion 3 
or larger than it is. It must have, then, something that specifies that 
quantity—[something] which is additional to the simple idea that neces­
sitates its existence and which is unlike the existence of the intellect. For 
[the latter] is pure existence, unspecified with a quantity contrary to all 
5 other quantities, so that one can say that [the intellect] needs only a sim­
ple cause. If it is said, "The reason for this is that, if it were larger than 
it is, it would not be needed for realizing the universal order; and, if 
smaller, it would not be suitable for the intended order," we say: 
(66) Is the assigning of the mode of the order sufficient for the exis-
10 tence of that through which the order comes to be, or does it need a cause 
that brings about [the latter's] existence? If sufficient, then you would 
not need to posit causes. Rule, then, that the existence of order in these 
existents decreed these existents without an additional cause. If not suffi­
cient, but requiring a cause, then this also would not be sufficient to specify 
15 quantities, but would also require a cause for composition. 
(67) The third is that the outermost heaven divides along two points, 
these being the two poles. These two are of fixed positions, never depart­
ing from their positions, while the parts of the zone differ in position. For 
then it follows either [(a)] that all parts of the outermost heaven are simi-
20 lar, [and hence it can be asked,] "Why was the assigning of two points 
from among the rest of the points to be the two poles rendered necessary?" 
or [(b)] their parts are different. In some, then, there would be special 
characteristics not [found] in others. What, then, is the principle of these 
differences, when the outermost body proceeded only from one simple idea, 
25 and when the simple necessitates only what is simple in shape (namely, 
the spherical) and what is similar in idea (namely, one devoid of differen­
tiated characteristics)? From this, also, there is no escape [for them]. 
(68) It may be said: "Perhaps there are in the principle [of these 
differences] kinds of multiplicity that are necessary, [but] not from the 
30 direction of the [First] Principle, of which only three or four have 
become apparent to us and of the rest [of which] we have no knowledge. 
Our not coming across [the rest] in the concrete does not make us doubt 
that the principle of multiplicity is multiple and that from the one the 
many do not proceed." [To this] we say: 

Page 176: [No Text Extracted]

Page 177:
74 Discussion 3 
(69) If you allow this, then say that all the existents, with all their 
great number—and they are in the thousands—have proceeded from 
the first effect, and there is no need to restrict [what proceeds from it] to 
the body of the outermost heaven and its soul. Rather, it is possible that 
5 all celestial and human souls, all terrestrial and celestial bodies, have 
proceeded from it with many kinds of multiplicity necessary in them 
[that] they have not known. Hence, there would be no need for the first 
effect. Furthermore, from this there follows the absence of [any] need for 
the First Cause. For, if the generation of plurality that is said to be nec-
10 essary without a cause, even though not necessary for the existence of 
the first effect, is permitted, it becomes allowed to suppose this with the 
First Cause and [to suppose] that their existence would be without a 
cause. It would then be said that these are necessary, but their number is 
not known. Whenever their existence without a cause with the First 
15 [Cause] is imagined, this [existence] without a cause is imagined with 
the second [cause]. Indeed, there is no meaning to our saying "[their 
being] with the First [Cause]" and "[with] the second," since there is no 
difference between them in either time or space. For that which does not 
differ from the two in space and time and can exist without a cause will 
20 not have one of the two [rather than the other] specifically related to it. 
(70) If it is said, "Things have become numerous so as to exceed a 
thousand, and it is unlikely that multiplicity in the first effect should 
reach this extent, and for this reason we have increased the [number of] 
intermediaries," we say: 
25 (71) Someone's saying, "This is unlikely," is sheer supposition in 
terms of which no judgment is made in rational [arguments], unless he 
says, "It would be impossible," in which case we would then say: 
(72) Why would it be impossible? What prevents it, and what [oper­
ative] deciding criterion is there, once we go beyond the one and believe 
30 that it is possible [that there may] follow necessarily from the first 
effect—not by way of the [First] Cause—one, two, or three concomitants? 
What would render four, five, and so on up to a thousand impossible? 
Otherwise, [when] anyone arbitrarily decides on one quantity rather 
than another, then, after going beyond the one, there is nothing to prevent 
35 [greater numbers]. This [answer] is also conclusive. 

Page 178: [No Text Extracted]

Page 179:
75 Discussion 3 
(73) We further say: "This is false with respect to the second effect. 
For from it proceeded the sphere of the fixed stars, which includes over 
twelve hundred stars. These vary in size, shape, position, color, influence— 
in being bad omens and in being omens of bliss. Some have the figure 
5 of the ram, [some] of the bull, [some] of the lion, [some] the figure of a 
human. Their influence in one place in the lower world differs in terms 
of cooling [or] heating [or] bringing about good and bad luck. Moreover, 
their sizes differ in themselves. Thus, with all these differences, it cannot 
be said that the whole constitutes one species. If this were possible, it 
10 would be possible to say that all the bodies of the world are one in corpo­
reality, and, hence, it would be sufficient for them to have one cause. If, 
then, the differences in the qualities [of the bodies of the world], their 
substances, and [their] natures indicate their differences, then likewise 
the fixed stars are necessarily different, each requiring a cause for its form; 
15 a cause for its matter; a cause for its having a particular nature that 
either heats [or] cools, brings about a good omen or a bad omen; [a 
cause] for its belonging specifically to its place; and [a cause] for [the 
resemblance of] their groups to specific figures of different beasts. And, 
if the intellectual apprehension of this multiplicity is conceivable in the 
20 second effect, it is conceivable in the first effect, wherewith there comes 
about the dispensing [with the second effect]." 
(74) The fifth objection is that we say: 
(75) We will concede these insipid postulates and false arbitrary 
[assertions]. But how is it that you are not embarrassed by your statement 
25 that the first effect, being possible of existence, required the existence 
from it of the outermost sphere, [that] its intellectual apprehension of 
itself required the existence from it of the soul of the sphere, and [that] 
its apprehension of the First requires the existence from it of an intellect? 
What is the difference between this and someone who—knowing 
30 the existence of a man who is absent, [knowing] that [such a man] is 
possible of existence, [knowing] that he apprehends himself and his 
Maker—then [goes on to] say: "The existence of a celestial sphere follows 
necessarily from [this man's] being possible of existence"? To this it 
would then be said: "What relationship is there between his being 
35 possible of existence and the existence from him of a celestial sphere?" 
Similarly, from his intellectual apprehension of himself and of his Maker, 
two things would have to follow necessarily. This, when spoken of in 

Page 180: [No Text Extracted]

Page 181:
76 Discussion 3 
terms of a human, evokes [nothing but] laughter, and it would [evoke] 
the same [when said of any] other existent. For the possibility of exis­
tence is a proposition that does not differ with the difference of that 
which is possible, be this a human, an angel, or a celestial sphere. I do 
5 not know how [even] a madman would in himself be satisfied by the likes 
of such postulates, to say nothing of [those] rational people who split 
hairs in what they claim in matters intellectual. 
; (76) It may be said: 
(77) If you have refuted their doctrine, what do you yourselves say? 
10 Do you claim that, from the thing that is one in every respect, two different 
things proceed, thereby affronting what is intelligible; would you say that 
the First Principle possesses multiplicity, thereby abandoning divine unity; 
would you say that there is no plurality in the world, denying thereby 
[the evidence of] the senses; or, would you say that [plurality] is neces-
15 sitated through intermediaries, being compelled thereby to acknowledge 
what [the philosophers] say? 
(78) We say: 
(79) We have not plunged into this book in the manner of one who is 
introducing [doctrine], our purpose being to disrupt their claims—and 
20 this has been effected. Nonetheless, we say: "Whoever claims that what­
ever leads to the proceeding of two things from one is an affront to rea­
son, or that describing the First Principle as having eternal, everlasting 
attributes contradicts [the doctrine of] divine unity, [should note] that 
these two claims are false and [that the philosophers] have no demon-
25 stration to prove them." For the impossibility of the proceeding of two 
things from one is not known in the way the impossibility of an individ­
ual's being in two places is known. In brief, this is known neither through 
[rational] necessity nor through theoretical reflection. What is there to 
prevent one from saying that the First Principle is knowing, powerful, 
30 willing; that He enacts as He wishes, governs what He wills, creates 
things that are varied and things that are homogeneous as He wills and 
in the way He wills? The impossibility of this is known neither through 
rational necessity nor through theoretical reflection. [That this is the 
case] has been conveyed by the prophets, [and the veracity of their 
35 prophethood has been] supported by miracles. Hence, it must be 
accepted. Investigating the manner of the act's proceeding from God 
through will is presumption and a coveting of what is unattainable. The 
end product of the reflection of those who have coveted seeking [this] 

Page 182: [No Text Extracted]

Page 183:
77 Discussion 3 
relationship and knowing it reduces to [the notion] that the first effect, 
inasmuch as it is possible of existence, [results in the] procession from it 
of a celestial sphere; and, inasmuch as it intellectually apprehends itself, 
the soul of the sphere proceeds from it. This is stupidity, not the showing 
5 of a relationship. 
(80) Let, then, the principles of these things be accepted from the 
prophets, and let [the philosophers] believe in them, since reason does not 
render [these principles] impossible. Let investigating quality, quantity, 
and quiddity be abandoned. For this is not something which the human 
10 faculties can encompass. And, for this reason, the one who conveyed the 
religious law has said: "Think on the creation of God and do not think on 
the essence of God." 

Page 184: [No Text Extracted]

Page 185:
[Fourth] Discussion 
On showing their inability to prove the 
existence of the Maker of the world 
(1) We say: 
(2) People divide into two groups: [(1)] The group of people that fol­
low the truth and have perceived that the world is created and have known 
necessarily that the created does not exist by itself and, hence, needs a 
5 maker, their doctrine upholding [belief in] the Maker being therefore 
comprehensible; [(2)] another group—namely, the materialists—who 
perceive the world to have existed pre-eternally in the way that it exists 
[now] and have not affirmed [the existence of] the Maker. The belief [of 
the latter] is understandable, even though proof shows its falsity. As for 
10 the philosophers, they perceived the world to be pre-eternal, then, 
despite this, have affirmed for it a maker. This doctrine is, as it stands, 
contradictory, there being no need in [its postulation] for a refutation. 
(3) [It may, however,] be said: 
(4) When we say that the world has a maker, we do not intend by it 
15 an agent who chooses, who acts after not having acted, as we observe in 
the different kinds of agents such as the tailor, the weaver, and the 
builder. Rather, we mean by it the cause of the world, naming it the First 
Principle, in the sense that His existence has no cause, whereas He 
is the cause of the existence of [all] other [existents]. If we name Him 
20 "Maker," it is in this figurative sense. The affirmation of an existent that 
has no cause rests on conclusive demonstration which is nigh, for we 
[philosophers] say: 
-78-

Page 186: [No Text Extracted]

Page 187:
79 Discussion 4 
(5) The world (with its existents) either has a cause or does not have 
a cause. If it has a cause, then [the question arises]: "Does this cause 
have a cause or is it without a cause?" [If it has a cause,] the same [ques­
tion] applies to the cause of the cause. This would either regress infinitely, 
5 which would be impossible, or terminate with a limit. The latter, then, is 
a first cause that has no cause for its existence. We call this the First 
Principle. If [on the other hand it is maintained that] the world exists by 
itself, having no cause, the First Principle would become evident. For we 
did not mean by it anything other than an uncaused existent.1 This is 
10 established necessarily. 
(6) Yes, it is not permissible for the First Principle to be the heavens, 
because they constitute a number [of things], and the proof of divine 
oneness prohibits this. Its falsity is thus known by examining the attribute 
of the [First] Principle. Nor can it be said that it is one heaven, one body, 
15 one sun, or some other thing. For [such a thing] would be a body, and 
body is composed of form and matter, whereas the First Principle cannot 
be composite. This is known through another theoretical investigation. 
What is intended is that an existent that has no cause for its existence is 
affirmed necessarily and by agreement. The disagreement, however, per-
20 tains only to the attributes [of the Principle]. 
(7) This [the philosophers conclude] is what we mean by the First 
Principle. 
(8) [Our] answer [to this] is in two ways: 
(9) The first is that it follows necessarily, according to the pattern of 
25 your doctrine, that the bodies of the world are also pre-eternal, having no 
cause. Your statement that the falsity of this is known through another 
theoretical investigation will be refuted in the discussion on [divine] 
unity and [your] denial of the [divine] attributes, following this discussion. 
(10) The second [way], which pertains specifically to this discussion, 
30 is to say: "It [becomes] established, by way of supposition,2 that these 
existents have a cause, but that their cause has a cause, and the cause 
of the cause a cause, and so on ad infinitum. Your statement that it is 
impossible to affirm causes that are infinite [cannot] be in line with 
[what you hold]. For we say: 'Do you know this through the necessity of 
35 rational thought, without a middle term; or do you know it through a 
middle term?' There is no recourse [for you] to invoke rational necessity. 

Page 188: [No Text Extracted]

Page 189:
80 Discussion 4 
And [in the case of argument involving a middle term] every path you 
mentioned in theoretical investigation has proved false for you by [your] 
allowing the existence of events that have no beginning. If, then, it is 
possible that that which is infinite should enter existence, then it is not 
5 unlikely that some [existents] are causes for others, terminating in the 
final end with an effect that has no effect, but not terminating in the 
other direction with a cause that has no cause—just as past time 
[according to you] has an end, being the existing 'now,' but [having] no 
beginning. If you claim that past events do not coexist at one time nor at 
10 some times and that what has ceased to exist is not characterized with 
either finitude or the privation of finitude, then there is necessarily 
forced on you [the case of] the human souls that separate from bodies. 
For, according to you, these do not perish; and the existing souls that 
separate from the body are infinite in their number, since there contin-
15 ues to come about endlessly a sperm from a human and a human from a 
sperm. Moreover, the soul of each human that dies continues to exist, 
being numerically other than the soul of the one who died before him, 
(who dies] with him, and [who will die] after him, even though all are 
one in species. Hence, according to you, within existence, at every 
20 [moment of] time, there are souls whose number is infinite." 
(11) [The philosophers may] say: 
(12) Souls have no connection one with another and have no order 
either by nature or position. We only deem impossible an infinity of exis­
tents if they have order in position, as with bodies—for these are arranged 
25 one atop the other—or by nature, as with causes and effects. But this is 
not the case with souls. 
(13) We say: 
(14) The consequence of this judgment regarding position has no 
greater claim [to truth] than its opposite. Why did you deem impossible 
30 one of the two alternatives and not the other? What is the decisive demon­
strative proof here? And with what would you deny one who says that 
these souls [which, according to you] are infinite, are not without order, 
since the existence of some precedes others? For the past days and nights 

Page 190: [No Text Extracted]

Page 191:
81 Discussion 4 
are infinite. If we suppose the existence of one soul in each day and night, 
the sum of existence up to the present would be infinite, occurring in an 
order of existence—that is, one after another. With reference to the cause, 
the most that can be said about it is that it is by nature prior to the effect, 
5 just as it is said that it is above the effect in essence, not in place. If, then, 
[the infinite] is not impossible in the real temporal "before," it ought not to 
be impossible in the essential, natural "before." And why is it that they 
do not allow bodies on top of each other infinitely in space, but allow 
existents temporally preceding each other ad infinitum? Is this not an 
10 arbitrary, insipid judgment that is groundless? 
(15) [The philosophers may] say: 
(16) The conclusive demonstration for the impossibility of infinite 
causes is to say: "Each one of the individual causes is either in itself 
possible or necessary. If [it is] necessary, then it would not need a cause.3 
15 If [it is] possible, then the whole is characterized with possibility. Every 
possible needs a cause additional to itself. The whole, then, needs an 
extraneous cause." 
(17) We say: 
(18) The expressions "the possible" and "the necessary" are vague 
20 expressions, unless by "the necessary" is intended that whose existence 
has no cause and by "the possible" that whose existence has a cause. If 
this, then, is what is intended, let us, then, turn again to this expression. 
We will thus say: "Each one [of the causes] is possible in the sense that 
it has a cause additional to itself, and the whole is not possible [but nec-
25 essary] in the sense that it does not have a cause additional to itself, 
extraneous to it."4 If the expression "the possible" is intended to mean 
other than what we intended, this would be incomprehensible. 
(19) If it is said, "This leads to [the consequence] that the necessary 
existent would have [its] subsistence through [things] possible of exis-
30 tence, which is impossible," we say: 

Page 192: [No Text Extracted]

Page 193:
82 Discussion 4 
(20) If you intended by "the necessary" and "the possible" that 
which we have mentioned, then this is the very thing we are after. We do 
not admit that it is impossible. It is similar to one's saying, "It is impos­
sible for the pre-eternal to have its subsistence in temporal events," 
5 when time, according to them, is eternal and the individual celestial 
movements are temporal events, having beginnings, whereas [their] 
totality has no beginning. Hence, that which has no beginning has been 
rendered subsistent by those things that have beginnings, and what is 
true of those that have beginnings is applicable to the individual units 
10 but not true of the totality. Similarly, it can be said about each individual 
unit that it has a cause, but it is not said that the totality has a cause. Not 
everything that is true of the individual units is true of the totality. For it 
would be true of each individual that it is one, that it is a part, and that 
it has a part, but it would not be true of the totality. Every place on earth 
15 that we specify is lit by the sun during the day becomes dark at night, 
and each [of these events] comes into temporal existence after not 
being—that is, it has a beginning. But the totality, for [the philosophers], 
is that which has no beginning. Hence, it has become evident that who­
ever allows the possibility of events that have no beginning—namely, the 
20 forms of the four elements and of [all] the things that undergo change— 
is unable to deny causes that are infinite. From this it comes about that 
they have no way of reaching [the point] of affirming the First Principle, 
for this [very] difficulty. Their distinguishing [between the two cases], 
hence, reduces to that which is sheer arbitrariness. 
25 (21) [The philosophers may] say: 
(22) The [celestial] circular motions do not exist at the present, nor 
[do] the forms of the elements. The existent among these is only [the] 
one form that is in actuality. What does not exist is not characterized by 
being either finite or infinite, unless their existence is supposed in the 
30 estimative faculty. What is supposed in the estimation is not improbable 
[when viewed within this faculty], even though the things that are 
supposed are causes of each other. For man may hypothesize this in his 
estimation. But what is being discussed is the existent in the concrete, 
not in the mind. 
35 (23) The only [problematic] thing that remains is [the question of] 
the souls of dead humans. Some philosophers have held that they are 
eternal [and were] one before joining the bodies, and that with their sepa­
ration [after death] from the bodies they reunite. Thus, they will have no 

Page 194: [No Text Extracted]

Page 195:
83 Discussion 4 
number, to say nothing about their being described as infinite. Others 
have said that the soul is dependent on the composition of the body and 
that the meaning of death is its annihilation, [as] it has no subsistence 
in terms of its [own] substance without the body. Thus, there is no exis-
5 tence for souls except with respect to the living. But the living that exist 
are restricted [in number], and finitude is not removed from them. The 
nonexistents are fundamentally not described in terms of the existence 
of finitude or its nonexistence, except in the estimation if hypothesized 
as existing. 
10 (24) The answer [is as follows]: 
(25) We brought the difficulty regarding the souls against Avicenna, 
Al-Farabi, and the exacting among [the philosophers], inasmuch as they 
have judged that the soul is a self-subsistent substance, this being the 
choice of Aristotle and the commentators among the early [thinkers]. 
15 With respect to those who have swerved away from this course, we say: 
(26) Is it or is it not conceivable that something should originate [at 
a moment in time] and endure? If they say, "No," [they would be stating 
what is] impossible; and, if they answer, "Yes," we would then say: 
(27) If we suppose the temporal occurrence and endurance of one 
20 thing in each day, there would necessarily accrue for us, up to the pre­
sent, existents that are infinite. For, even though the [past celestial] cir­
cular motion ceases to exist, the occurrence in it of an existent that 
endures and does not cease to exist is not impossible. With this possibil­
ity considered [in the mind], the difficulty becomes firmly established. It 
25 makes no difference whether that which endures is the soul of a human, 
of a genie, of a devil, of an angel, or of whatever existent you wish. It is a 
necessary consequence of every doctrine they have, inasmuch as they 
have affirmed [celestial] motions that are infinite. 

Page 196: [No Text Extracted]

Page 197:
[Fifth] Discussion 
On showing their inability to prove that 
God is one and that it is impossible to suppose 
two necessary existents, each having no cause 
(1) Their proof for this is in two ways. 
(2) The first is their statement that, if there were two [necessary 
existents], then the species, being necessary of existence, would be pred­
ictable of each one of them. That of which being "necessary of existence" 
5 is predicated must either be [such] that it is necessary of existence in 
itself [and] its existence through another thus inconceivable, or [such] 
that the necessity of existence belongs to it through a cause, whereby the 
essence of the necessary existent would be caused, and some cause it has 
had required [for it] the necessity of existence.1 We do not intend by the 
10 "necessary of existence" anything other than that whose existence is not 
linked in anyway to a cause. 
(3) [The philosophers, moreover,] claim that the human species is 
predicated of [both] Zayd and 'Amr and that Zayd is not [rendered] 
human by reason of his [very] self, since, if he were [rendered] human by 
15 reason of his [very] self,2 then cAmr would not be human; rather, [Zayd 
is rendered human] through a cause which rendered him human and 
which rendered cAmr also human.3 Thus, humanity has become multiple 
through the multiplicity of the matter that is its substratum. Its attach­
ment to matter is an effect and is not due to humanity itself. 
20 In the same way, if the establishing of the necessity of existence for the 
Necessary Existent is through Himself, [the necessity of existence] 
would belong only to Him; [but,] if [it is] through a cause, He then 
becomes an effect and not necessary of existence. From this it has become 
evident that the Necessary Existent must be one. 
-84-

Page 198: [No Text Extracted]

Page 199:
85 Discussion 5 
(4) [To this first way] we reply: 
(5) Your statement, "The species 'necessity of existence' belonging to 
the Necessary Existent is either by reason of Himself or due to a cause," 
is a division that is faulty in its formulation. For we have shown that in 
5 the utterance "necessary of existence" there is imprecision, unless one 
intends by it the denial of [having] a cause. Let, then, this expression be 
used [in this sense]. We say: 
(6) Why is it impossible for two existents having no cause, neither 
being the cause of the other, to stand firmly? For your statement that 
10 that which has no cause has no cause either by reason of itself or due 
to a cause is a faulty division. For the denial of a cause and the absence 
of the need of a cause for existence do not need a cause. What sense is 
there to one's saying, "That which has no cause has no cause either by 
reason of itself or due to a cause"? For our statement, "It has no cause," 
15 is pure negation; and pure negation has no cause, and one does not speak 
of it as being either by reason of itself or not by reason of itself. And, if 
you intend by the necessity of existence a permanent description of the 
Necessary Existent other than His being an existent whose existence has 
no cause, this in itself would be incomprehensible. What is forged from 
20 uttering [the expression "necessary existent"] is the denial of a cause for 
His existence, which is pure negation about which it is said, "It is neither 
by reason of itself nor due to a cause," so as to build on the formulation of 
this disjunction a [meaningful] purpose. This shows that this is a demon­
stration of one who has waxed senile and is baseless. Rather, we say: 
25 (7) The meaning that He is necessary of existence is that there is 
no cause for His existence and no cause for His being without a cause. 
Nor, moreover, is His being without a cause causally explicable in terms 
of Himself. Rather, there is fundamentally neither a cause for His exis­
tence nor a cause for His being without a cause. How is this not so, when 
30 this division does not apply to some of the positive attributes, to say noth­
ing of those that reduce to negation? Someone, however, may say: 
(8) Blackness is either a color in virtue of itself or due to a cause. If by 
virtue of itself, then it follows necessarily that redness is not a color and 
that this species—I mean, being a color—would belong only to the essence 
35 of blackness. If blackness were a color due to a cause that rendered it a 
color, then one ought to [be able to] conceive of a blackness which is not 

Page 200: [No Text Extracted]

Page 201:
86 Discussion 5 
a color—that is, [one] that the cause did not render as a color. For whatever 
is affirmed for the essence as something additional to the essence through 
a cause, the supposition of [that thing's] nonexistence in the estimative 
faculty is possible, even if this is not realized in [extramental] existence. 
5 (9) But [to this] one says: "This division is faulty in [its] postulation." 
For one does not say of blackness that it is a color in itself in such a way 
that this prevents [color] from belonging to another essence. Similarly, one 
does not say that this existent is necessary in itself—that is, that it has no 
cause for its essence, in such a way that this prevents this ["necessity of 
10 existence"] from belonging, under any circumstance, to another entity. 
(10) The second way consists in their saying: 
(11) If we suppose two necessary existents, these would either be 
similar in every way or be different. If similar in every way, then multi­
plicity and duality would be unintelligible. For two instances of black are 
15 two when they are in two places or in one place but at two [different] 
times, since blackness and motion in one place at one time are two because 
their essences differ. But, if the two essences, such as the two instances 
of black, do not differ, time and place coinciding, [their] multiplicity 
becomes unintelligible. If it were permissible to say that in the same time 
20 and in the same place there are two instances of black, it would become 
permissible to say with respect to each individual that it is two individuals 
but that no difference between them is evident. If, then, similarity in 
every respect is impossible and difference is inevitable—the difference, 
however, being neither in time nor in space—there only remains the 
25 difference in essence. 
(12) So long, then, as the two [hypothesized necessary existents] dif­
fer in something, then they must either share in something or not share 
in anything. If they do not share in something, this would be impossible, 
since it would follow necessarily that they neither share in existence, nor 
30 in the necessity of existence, nor in their being individually self-subsistent, 
nor [inhering] in a subject. Alternatively, if they share in something and 
differ in another, then that which constitutes the sharing would be other 
than that which constitutes the difference. There would then be composi­
tion and lexical division. But the necessary of existence has no compo-
35 sition and is not qualitatively divisible; hence, it is not divided in [terms 
of] the lexical explanatory statement.4 For its essence is not composed of 

Page 202: [No Text Extracted]

Page 203:
87 Discussion 5 
things [whereby] the explanatory statement would indicate its being 
multiple, as with the indication "animal" and "rational," [which points] 
to that through which the quiddity of man subsists. For [man] is [both] 
animal and rational; but the indication of the expression "animal," with 
5 respect to man, is other than the indication of the expression "rational." 
Man, hence, is composed of parts that are ordered in the definition through 
utterances that point to these parts, whereby the term "man" indicates 
[their] composite. This is inconceivable [in the Necessary Existent], and 
without [this composition] duality is inconceivable. 
10 (13) [Our] answer [is as follows]: 
(14) It is admitted that duality is only conceivable through difference 
in something and that the difference between two things that are similar 
in every respect is inconceivable. Your statement, however, that this kind 
of composition is impossible in the First Principle is sheer arbitrariness. 
15 What demonstration is there for this? 
(15) Let us describe this problem [as it stands] independently.5 
Among their well-known statements is that the First Principle is not divis­
ible in terms of verbal definition, just as It is not divisible quantitatively. 
For them, the proof of God's unity is built on this. Indeed, they claim 
20 that the doctrine of divine unity is only completed by establishing unity 
for the essence of the Creator in every respect and that proving unity 
obi ains through the denial of plurality in all respects. Plurality [they con­
tinue] finds access to essences in five ways. 
(16) The first is through the reception of division either in actuality 
25 or in the estimation. For this reason, the one body is not absolutely one. 
For it is one through the continuity that stands [existing for it], which is 
subject to cessation. It is, thus, quantitatively divisible in the estimation. 
And this is impossible in [the case of] the First Principle. 
(17) The second is that a thing is divisible in the mind into two dif-
30 ferent meanings, not by way of quantity. An example of this would be the 
division of the body into matter and form. For, although it is inconceivable 
for each one of matter and form to subsist by itself without the other, 
these are two things different in definition and reality through whose 

Page 204: [No Text Extracted]

Page 205:
88 Discussion 5 
combination one thing is realized—namely, body. This also is denied of 
God. For the Creator can be neither form in a body, nor matter in a hyle 
for a body, nor a combination of both. As regards the combination of the 
two, this is due to two causes. One of them is that [when division takes 
J place] it is quantitatively divisible either in actuality or in the estimation. 
The second is that it is divisible in terms of meaning into form and matter. 
[God] cannot be matter, since [matter] needs form; and the Necessary 
Existent is not in any respect in need [of anything], so that His existence 
cannot be linked to any condition besides itself. And He cannot be form, 
10 because [form] needs matter. 
(18) The third way [in which plurality finds access to essences] is 
through the [positive] attributes, by supposing the attributes of knowl­
edge, power, and will. Now, if these attributes are necessary of existence, 
then the necessity of existence would become common to the essence and 
15 these attributes. Plurality in the Necessary Existent becomes a necessary 
consequence, and unity ceases to be. 
(19) The fourth is an intellectual plurality that comes about through 
I he composition of genus and species. For black is [both] black and color. 
But blackness to the mind is other than being a color. Rather, being a 
20 color is a genus, and blackness is a differentia. Hence, [black] is composed 
of a genus and differentia. [Again] in the mind, animality is other than 
humanity. For man is [both] animal and rational. Animal is a genus, 
rational a differentia, [man] being composed of genus and differentia. 
This is a kind of plurality. [The philosophers] thus claimed that this also 
25 is denied of the First Principle. 
(20) The fifth is a plurality that becomes necessary by way of sup­
posing a quiddity and hypothesizing an existence for this quiddity. For 
there belongs to man a quiddity before existence.6 Existence occurs to 
[this quiddity] and is related to it. This, for example, is the case with the 
30 triangle; it has a quiddity—namely, its being a figure surrounded by 
three sides. Existence, however, is not part of the constitutive being of 
this quiddity, giving it subsistence. For this reason, the rational individual 
can apprehend the quiddity of man and the quiddity of the triangle with­
out knowing whether or not they have an existence in concrete reality.7 
35 If existence were to give subsistence to [the] quiddity [of a thing], one 
would not [be able to] conceive its standing firm in the mind prior to its 

Page 206: [No Text Extracted]

Page 207:
89 Discussion 5 
existence. Existence is, hence, [something] related to the quiddity— 
whether as a necessary concomitant such that that quiddity would [always] 
exist, as with the heavens, or as an occurrence after not being, as with the 
quiddity of humanity with respect to Zayd and cAmr and the quiddities of 
5 accidents and temporal forms. 
(21) [The philosophers] thus claim that this plurality must also be 
removed from the First [Principle]. It is thus said [that] He does not have 
a quiddity to which existence is related. Rather, necessary existence 
belongs to Him as quiddity belongs to others. Thus, necessary existence is 
10 a quiddity, a universal reality, and a true nature in the way that humanity, 
"tree-ness," and "heaven-ness" are quiddities. Now, if a quiddity [other 
than the necessity of existence] were to be affirmed [as belonging] to Him, 
then the necessity of existence would be a necessary concomitant of this 
quiddity, not [something] that renders it subsistent. But the necessary 
15 concomitant is consequent [on something] and is caused. Necessary exis­
tence would then be caused, which contradicts its being necessary. 
(22) Despite this, they say of the Creator that He is a principle, a first, 
an existent, a substance, one, pre-eternal, everlasting, knowing, an intel­
lect, one who apprehends intellectually, intelligible, an agent, a creator, 
20 a wilier, powerful, living, a lover, a beloved, enjoyable, one who enjoys, 
generous, and pure good. They claim that all this is an expression of one 
meaning that has no plurality. This [truly] is a wonder. Hence, we must 
first ascertain their doctrine for the purpose of explaining [it], then 
engage in objection. For the objection to doctrines before complete expla-
25 nation is blind shooting. 
(23) The basic point for understanding their doctrine consists in their 
saying [that] the essence of the First Principle is one, the names becom­
ing many by relating something to it, relating it to something, or negating 
something of it. Negation does not necessitate plurality in the essence of 
30 Him of whom [things] are negated, nor does relation necessitate plurality. 
Hence, they do not deny a multiplicity of negations and a multiplicity of 
relations, but the task [they maintain] is to reduce all these matters to 
negation and relation. They thus said: 

Page 208: [No Text Extracted]

Page 209:
90 Discussion 5 
(24) If it is said of Him, "First," this is in relation to the existents 
after Him; and, if it said, "Principle," this is an indication that the exis­
tence of [what is] other than Him is from Him, He being the cause of it. 
This, then, is a relation to His effects. If it is said, "Existent," it means, 
5 "He is known."8 If it is said, "Substance," it means that inherence in a 
subject is negated of [His] existence. This, then, is a negation. If it is said, 
"Pre-eternal," this means the negation of nonexistence of Him in terms 
of a first [beginning]; and if it is said, "Everlasting," this means the 
negation of nonexistence of Him in terms of a last [ending]. Thus, in the 
10 final analysis, the pre-eternal and the everlasting amount to an existence 
neither preceded by nonexistence nor succeeded by nonexistence. If it is 
said, "The Necessary Existent," this means that He is an existent that has 
no cause, while He is the cause of what is other than Him. This would 
thus be a combination of negation and relation, since the denial of a 
15 cause is a negation, while rendering Him a cause of another is a relation. 
If it is said, "Intellect," [this] means that He is an existent free of matter. 
Every existence having this description is an intellect; that is, it appre­
hends itself, is aware of it, and apprehends intellectually another. The 
essence of God has this as its characterization, and, hence, He is intellect, 
20 the two expressions ["being free from matter" and "intellect"] express­
ing one thing. If it is said, "Intellectual Apprehender," [this] means that 
His essence, which is an intellect, has an intelligible, which is His essence. 
For He is aware of Himself and apprehends Himself. Hence, His essence 
is an intelligible, His essence is an intellectual apprehender, and His 
25 essence is Intellect, all being one. For He is an intelligible, inasmuch as 
He is a quiddity free from matter, not concealed from His essence— 
which is intellect in the sense of being a quiddity devoid of matter— 
where nothing is concealed from Him. Inasmuch as He intellectually 
apprehends Himself, He is an intellectual apprehender; inasmuch as He 
30 Himself is an intelligible for Himself, He is an intelligible; and inasmuch 
as His intellectual apprehension is by His essence, not by [something] 
additional to His essence, He is an intellect. It is not [an] unlikely [thing] 
for the intellectual apprehender and the intelligible to become one. For, 
if the intellectual apprehender apprehends his being an apprehender, he 
35 apprehends it by being an apprehender. Hence, the intellectual appre­
hender and the intelligible become in some respect one. And if, in this, 
our intellect differs from the mind of the First, this is because what 
belongs to the First is ever in actuality, while what belongs to us is at one 
time in potentiality and at another in act. 

Page 210: [No Text Extracted]

Page 211:
91 Discussion 5 
(25) If it is said [of Him], "Creator, Agent, and Maker [of the 
world]" and the rest of the attributes of action, [all these] mean that His 
existence is a noble existence from which the existence of everything 
emanates in a necessary manner, and that the existence of other 
5 [things] comes about through Him and is consequent on His existence 
in the same way as light follows the sun and heat [follows] fire. The rela­
tion of the world to Him is similar to the relation of light to the sun only 
in [the world's] being an effect. And, if [they are similar only in this],9 
then He is not akin [to the sun]. For the sun is not aware of the emana-
10 tion of light from it, nor fire of the emanation of heat [from it]. For this 
is pure nature. Rather, the First knows His essence and that His essence 
is the principle of the existence of others. Hence, the emanation of 
whatever emanates from Him is known to Him. There is, therefore, no 
unawareness on His part of what proceeds from Him. Nor is [God], more-
15 over, akin to one of us who stands between a sick person and the sun, 
whereby the heat of the sun is deflected from the sick person because of 
him, [though the deflection is] not [caused] by his choice. The individual 
[intervening between sun and patient], however, is cognizant [of the 
deflection], without, moreover, being averse to it. For that which casts 
20 the shade, that which enacts the shadow, is his person and body, whereas 
the one who is cognizant of the falling of the shadow and is satisfied with 
it is his soul, not his body. This is not the case with respect to the First. 
For the enactor in Him is the knower and the one satisfied—that is, the 
one not averse [to the act]. For He knows that His perfection lies in having 
25 another emanate from Him. Indeed, if it were possible to suppose the 
body itself casting the shade, to be itself the knower of the falling of the 
shadow and to be the one satisfied [with this], this would also not be equal 
to the First. For the First is the knower and the doer, and His knowledge 
is the principle of His act. For His knowledge of Himself in being the 
30 principle of everything is the cause of the emanation of all things. 
(26) The existing order is a consequent of the intelligible order in 
the sense that [the former] comes about through [the latter]. Hence, His 
being an agent is not additional to His being a knower of the whole, since 
His knowledge of the whole is the cause of the emanation of the whole 
35 from Him. His being a knower of the whole is not [something] additional 
to His knowledge of Himself. For He would not know Himself without 
His knowing that He is the Principle for the whole. Thus, what is known 
by the first intention is Himself, and the whole would be known to Him by 
the second intention. This, then, is the meaning of His being an agent. 

Page 212: [No Text Extracted]

Page 213:
92 Discussion 5 
(27) If it is said [of Him], "Powerful," we do not mean by it [anything] 
other than His being an agent in the manner we have established— 
namely, that His existence is an existence from which [all] things under 
His power emanate and through whose emanation the arrangement of 
5 the whole is ordered according to the highest reaching of the modes 
of possibility in terms of perfection and beauty. If it is said, "Wilier," we 
do not mean by it [anything] other than that He is not oblivious of what 
emanates from Him and is not averse to it, but, rather, that He knows 
His perfection consists in having the whole emanate from Him. It is thus 
10 permissible to say in this sense that He is satisfied, and it is permissible 
to say of the One Satisfied that He is a Wilier. Thus, Will would be noth­
ing other than Power itself, Power nothing other than Knowledge itself, 
Knowledge nothing other than the Essence itself. All, then, reduces to 
the Essence itself. This is because His knowledge of things does not 
15 derive from things. Otherwise, He would be acquiring an attribute or a 
perfection from another, which is impossible in the Necessary Existent. 
(28) Our [own] knowledge, however, is of two divisions: [(a)] knowl­
edge of a thing that occurs as a result of the form of that thing, as with 
our knowledge of the form of heaven and the earth; and [(b)] knowledge 
20 which we invent, as with something whose form we did not perceive but 
which we formed in our souls, then brought into existence, in which case 
the existence of the form would be derived from knowledge, not knowl­
edge from [the] existence [of the form]. Knowledge [that belongs to] 
the First is in accordance with the second division. For the representa-
25 tion of the order in His essence is a cause for the emanation of the order 
from His essence. 
(29) Yes, if the sheer presence of an etching or of the writing of a 
line in our souls is sufficient for the occurrence of such a form, then 
knowledge itself with respect to us is [one and the same as] power itself 
30 and will itself. But, because of our shortcomings, our conception is not 
sufficient to bring about the existence of the form but requires, in addi­
tion to that, a renewed will that springs forth from an appetitive power 
so that, through both, the power that moves the muscles and nerves in 
the organic parts [is able to] move [them]. Thus, through the movement 
35 of the muscles and nerves the hand or some other [organ] moves, and 

Page 214: [No Text Extracted]

Page 215:
93 Discussion 5 
r 
with its movement the pen or some other external instrument moves. 
Then, by the movement of the pen, matter such as ink or some other 
thing is moved, after which the form conceived in our souls is realized. 
For this reason, the very existence of this form in our souls is neither 
5 power nor will. Rather, power in us exists with the principle that moves 
the muscle, while this form [we conceive in ourselves] is the mover of 
that mover which is the principle of power. This is not the case with the 
Necessary Existent. For He is not composed of bodies in whose limbs 
power is infused. Hence, Power, Will, Knowledge, and Essence are, with 
10 respect to Him, one [and the same]. 
(30) If it is said of Him, "Living," by this is only intended that He 
knows by a knowledge through which the existent that is termed an act of 
His emanates. For the Living is the doer and the knower. Thus, what is 
intended [by "Living"] is His essence, together with a relation to actions 
15 in the way we have mentioned. [This] is not like our life. For it is not com­
pleted except through two diverse faculties from which apprehension 
and action spring forth. Hence, His Life is also identical with His essence. 
(31) If it is said of Him, "Generous," by this is intended that the whole 
emanates from Him, not for any purpose [fulfilling a need] that reverts 
20 to Him. Generosity is fulfilled by two things. The first is that there should 
be for the one on whom the act of generosity is bestowed a benefit in what 
has been granted. For one may not ascribe generosity to whoever grants a 
person something for which [the person] has no need. The second is that 
the generous person is in no need of generosity when his undertaking 
25 [the act of] generosity would be for fulfilling a personal need. Whoever is 
generous in order to be praised and lauded or to escape from being 
blamed is someone seeking compensation and is not being generous. 
True generosity belongs to God. For He does not seek by it escape from 
blame, nor any perfection acquired through praise. "The Generous," 
30 hence, becomes a name indicating His existence in conjunction with a 
relation to [His] act and a negation of a purpose. Therefore, it does not 
lead to plurality in His essence. 
(32) If it is said [of Him], "Pure Good," by this is intended either 
[one of two things. The first is] the existence of a creator free from 
ip deficiency and from the possibility of nonexistence. For evil has no entity 
unto itself, but reduces to the privation of a substance or a privation of 
the soundness of state of the substance. Otherwise, existence inasmuch 

Page 216: [No Text Extracted]

Page 217:
94 Discussion 5 
as it is existence is good. The term consequently reduces to the negation 
of the possibility of imperfection and evil. [The second is when] it is also 
said, "Good," to that which is the cause of the order of things. [Now, J the 
First is the Principle of the order of all things. He is thus "Good," the 
5 name indicating existence together with a kind of relation. 
(33) If it is said [of Him], "Necessary Existent," [this] means this 
existence [of His] with the negation of a cause for His existence and the 
impossibility for a cause for His nonexistence, whether at a beginning 
[of His existence] or at an end. 
10 (34) If it is said [of Him], "Lover, Beloved, Enjoyer, and Enjoyed," 
[this] means that all beauty, splendor, and perfection are the object of 
love and ardor in the One who has perfection. There is no meaning 
for "enjoyment" other than apprehending the appropriate perfection. 
Whoever knows his own perfection in knowing [all] the knowable things 
15 (supposing he were to know them)—the beauty of his form, the perfec­
tion of his power, the strength of his organs, and, in general, his appre­
hension of the presence of every perfection possible for him—if this 
were conceivable in one human, he would be a lover of his own perfection 
and one who enjoys it. His enjoyment, however, decreases by supposing 
20 privation and deficiency. For joy is rendered incomplete by what ceases 
to exist or by that whose ceasing to exist is feared. The First, however, has 
the most perfect splendor and the most complete beauty, since every per­
fection that is possible for Him is present to Him. He apprehends this 
perfection with the assurance against the possibility of [its] decrease and 
25 ceasing to be. The perfection that is realized for Him is above every per­
fection. Hence, His love and ardor for this perfection is above every love, 
and His enjoyment of it is above every enjoyment. Indeed, our enjoyment 
has no comparison to it at all. Rather, it is more exalted than to be 
expressed [in terms of] enjoyment, joy, and gladness, except that we 
30 have no expressions for these ideas [as they pertain to the divine]; one 
cannot escape from using remote metaphor. [This is] just as when we 
borrow as metaphor for Him from the expressions "Wilier," "Chooser," 
and "Enactor," [used to refer to] ourselves, while at the same time giving 
conclusive argument for the remoteness of His will from our will and the 
35 remoteness of His power and knowledge from our power and knowledge. 
It is not unlikely that one would deem the [use of the term] "enjoyment" 
[with reference to God] repugnant and would use another. What is 
intended, however, is that His state is nobler than the states of the 
angels and [is] more worthy to be the object of exultation—and the state 
40 of the angels is nobler than our states. 

Page 218: [No Text Extracted]

Page 219:
95 Discussion 5 
(35) If there is no enjoyment other than the pleasure of eating and 
copulation, then the state of the donkey and the pig would be nobler 
than the state of the angels. These—that is [to say], the principles [in 
the realm] of the angels that are devoid of matter—have no enjoyment 
5 other than joy in the awareness of that with which they have been specifi­
cally endowed by way of perfection and beauty, whose cessation is never 
feared. But that which belongs to the First is above that which belongs 
to the angels. For the existence of the angels that are intelligences sepa­
rate [from matter] is an existence that is possible in itself and necessary 
10 of existence through another. The possibility of nonexistence is a kind of 
evil and an imperfection. Hence, nothing is absolutely free from every evil 
except the First. For He is the Pure Good. To Him belong the most per­
fect splendor and beauty. Moreover, He is beloved, regardless of whether 
others love Him or not, just as He is [both] intellectual apprehender and 
15 intelligible, regardless of whether or not others apprehend Him. All 
these meanings reduce to His essence and His apprehension of His 
essence. His intellectual apprehension [of all this] and His intellectual 
apprehension of His essence are identical with His essence. For He is 
pure intellect. All, then, reduce to one meaning. 
20 (36) This, then, is the way to explain their doctrine. These matters 
divide into those [things] in which belief is permissible—where, however, 
we will show that it cannot be correctly held in terms of [the philosophers' 
own] principles—and those in which belief is not correct, where we will 
show its falsity. Let us, then, return to the five levels in the divisions of 
25 plurality and their claim of negating them, showing their impotence 
in establishing a proof. And let us describe each problem independently. 

Page 220: [No Text Extracted]

Page 221:
[Sixth] Discussion 
[On the divine attributes] 
(1) The philosophers have agreed, just as the Muctazila have agreed, 
on the impossibility of affirming knowledge, power, and will for the First 
Principle. They claimed that all these names have come about through 
the religious law and that it is permissible to use them verbally, but that, as 
5 has been previously explained, they reduce [referentially] to one essence. 
Moreover, [they claim that) it is not permissible to affirm attributes that 
are additional to His essence in the way it is allowable in our case for our 
knowledge and power to constitute a description of ourselves that is addi­
tional to our essence. They claim that this necessitates plurality because, 
10 if these attributes were to occur for us, we would know that they are addi­
tional to the essence, since they would have come about anew. If one 
supposes them to be attached to our existence without [temporal] delay, 
|their constant] attachment would not render them outside their being 
additional to the essence. For [in the case of any] two things, if one of 
15 them occurs to the other, and it is known that "this" is not "that" and 
"that" is not "this," should they also be [constantly] connected, their 
being two things would [still] be rationally apprehended. Hence, these 
attributes in being [always] connected with the essence of the First are 
not removed from being things other than the essence. This would, then, 
20 necessitate plurality in the Necessary Existent, which is impossible. For 
this reason they all agreed on the denial of the attributes. 
(2) [To this] one would say to them: 
(3) In terms of what have you known the impossibility of this mode of 
plurality? You are opposed [in this] by all the Muslims, with the exception 
25 of the Muctazila. What is the demonstration for this? For one's saying 
-96-

Page 222: [No Text Extracted]

Page 223:
97 Discussion 6 
that plurality is impossible in the Necessary Existent when the essence is 
described as one reduces to maintaining that a plurality of attributes 
is impossible, which is the point at issue. Its impossibility is not known 
through rational necessity, so one inescapably needs a demonstration. 
5 (4) [In answering this, the philosophers] adopt two ways. 
[(1)] 
(5) The first is their statement that the demonstration of this [is 
as follows: in the case of] both the attribute and the thing to which it 
is ascribed, if "this" is not "that" and "that" is not "this," then either 
[(a)] neither one will need the other for its existence, [(b)] each one will 
10 need the other, or [(c)] one will not need the other, the other needing 
[the former]. If each is supposed not to need the other, then both would 
be necessary of existence, which is the absolute rendering of duality and 
is impossible. But [if it is supposed] that each of the two is in need of the 
other, then neither would be necessary of existence, since the meaning of 
15 the necessary of existence is that which is self-subsistent and which has no 
need for another in any respect. For whatever is in need of another, that 
other would be its cause, since, if that other is removed [from existence], 
the existence [of the former] would become impossible. Hence, its exis­
tence would not be of itself, but through another. If it is said that only 
20 one of them needs [the other], that which has the need is an effect, the 
Necessary Existent being the other. And as long as it is an effect, it needs 
a cause. This leads to having the essence of the Necessary Existent be 
connected with a cause [other than it].1 
(6) [Our] objection to this [first way] is to say: 
25 (7) Of these divisions, the one to be chosen is the last. But your 
refuting the first division—namely, [that this leads to] absolute duality— 
is [something] we have shown in the previous question for which you have 
no demonstration; moreover, it is only complete by basing it on the denial 
of plurality [to be discussed] in this question and the one that follows. 
30 But how can that which is a branch of this question be the foundation on 
which the question is based? But the chosen [division consists] in saying 
that the essence in its subsistence does not need the attributes, but that 
the attribute, as with our case, is in need of that to which it is ascribed. 
There then remains their statement that that which needs another is not 
32? necessary of existence. 

Page 224: [No Text Extracted]

Page 225:
98 Discussion 6 
(8) To this it is said, "If by the necessary of existence you mean that 
which has no efficient cause, why do you say this? Why is it impossible to 
say that, just as the essence of the Necessary Existent is pre-eternal, hav­
ing no agent, His attribute is co-eternal with Him, having no agent? And, 
5 if by the necessary of existence you mean that which has no receptive 
cause, then, according to this interpretation, [the attribute] is not neces­
sary of existence, but despite this it is pre-eternal, having no agent. What 
renders this impossible?" 
(9) If it is said, "The absolutely necessary existent is the one that has 
10 a cause that is neither efficient nor receptive; if it is admitted that it 
has a receptive cause, then it is admitted that it is an effect," we say: 
(10) Naming the receptive essence a receptive cause is an idiom of 
yours. The proof [you offer] does not prove the existence of a necessary 
existent in terms of the idiom you adopt, proving only a limit with which 
15 the chain of causes and effects terminates. It proves only this much. The 
termination of the regress is possible with one [existent] that has eternal 
attributes that have no agent in the same way that there is no agent for 
His essence. These, however, are established in His essence. Let, then, 
the term "necessary existent" be cast aside, for one can be misled by it. 
20 Demonstration only shows the termination of regress, proving nothing 
else at all. To claim for it other than this is [sheer] arbitrariness. 
(11) If it is said, "Just as one must terminate regression with respect 
to the efficient cause, one must then terminate it with the receptive, 
since, if every existent needs a receptacle to subsist therein, the recepta-
25 cle also requiring a receptacle, regress would necessarily ensue, just as 
when every existent requires an [efficient] cause and that cause also a 
cause," we say: 
(12) You have said what is true. No doubt this regress must also be 
terminated. We have said that the attribute is in His essence, while His 
30 essence does not subsist in another. [This is] just as our knowledge is in our 
essence, our essence being a receptacle for it, while our essence is not in a 
receptacle. Hence, a regress of efficient causes for the [eternal] attribute 
is eliminated, along with [any efficient cause for] the essence, since it has 
no agent, just as the essence has no agent.2 Rather, the essence continues 
35 to exist [eternally] with this attribute without a cause for itself or for its 

Page 226: [No Text Extracted]

Page 227:
99 Discussion 6 
attribute. As for the receptive cause, its regress terminates only with the 
essence. Whence is it necessary that the receptacle should cease [to exist] 
so that [its having an efficient] cause should terminate? Demonstration 
only compels the termination of the regress. Any method through which 
5 the termination of the regress becomes possible constitutes a fulfillment 
of the dictate of the demonstration that requires [as its conclusion] the 
Necessary Existent. If by "necessary existent" is meant something other 
than an existent that does not have an efficient cause, wherewith regress 
terminates, we would basically not concede this as necessary. And as long 
10 as the mind encompasses the acceptance of an eternal existent whose 
existence has no cause, it encompasses the acceptance of an eternal 
characterized by attributes [—an existent] that has no cause for its exis­
tence either in its essence or in its attributes. 
[(2)1 
(13) The second way is their statement: 
15 (14) Knowledge and power in us are not included in the quiddity of 
ourselves, but are accidental. If these attributes are established for the 
First, they also would not be included in the quiddity of Himself3 but 
would be accidental in relation to Himself, even though they are perma­
nent for Him. Many an accidental [thing] does not separate from the 
20 quiddity or is a concomitant of a quiddity without becoming for this reason 
[something that] substantiates its essence. If accidental, it is a dependent 
ancillary of the essence, and the essence becomes a cause for it. It thus 
becomes an effect. How, then, would it be necessary of existence? 
(15) This [we say] is the same as the first [way], but with a change in 
25 expression. We thus say: 
(16) If you mean by its being ancillary to the essence and the essence 
being a cause for it that the essence is an efficient cause of it and that it is 
enacted by the essence, this is not the case. For this does not follow nec­
essarily in the case of our knowledge in relation to our essence, since our 
30 essences do not constitute an efficient cause for our knowledge. If you 
mean that the essence is a receptacle and that the attribute does not sub­
sist by itself without a receptacle, this is conceded. But why should this be 
impossible? For it to be referred to as "ancillary," as "accidental," as an 
"effect," or whatever the person expressing it intends does not change the 

Page 228: [No Text Extracted]

Page 229:
100 Discussion 6 
meaning, if the meaning is nothing other than its being subsistent in the 
essence in the way attributes subsist in the things that have attributes. 
It is not impossible for [the attribute] to be in an essence, being at the 
same time pre-eternal, having no agent. All their proofs [are in reality] 
5 horrifying, saddling an expression with bad connotations by calling 
[the attribute] "possible," "permissible," "ancillary," "concomitant," and 
"effect," [maintaining that] this is reprehensible. 
(17) [To this] it is said, "If by this is intended that [the attribute] has 
an agent, this is not the case. If by this is only intended that it has no 
10 agent but has a receptacle in which it subsists, then let this be given 
whatever expression one wants. For there is no impossibility in this." 
(18) They may, however, [attempt to] frighten by linking the expres­
sion with bad connotations in another way, saying: "This leads to [the 
conclusion] that the First needs these attributes. Hence, He would not be 
15 absolutely self-sufficient. For the absolutely self-sufficient is the one who 
does not need anything other than His self." This, however, is a language of 
[rhetorical] preaching that is feeble in the extreme. For the attributes 
of perfection do not separate from the essence of the Perfect, so as to 
say that He is in need of another. If He never ceased and never ceases 
20 [throughout eternity] to be perfect in terms of knowledge, power, and 
life, how could He be in need, and how can one express adherence to per­
fection as a need? This is similar to someone's statement: "The perfect 
is the one who does not need perfection. Hence, the one who needs the 
attributes of perfection for himself is deficient"—to which one [replies]: 
25 "There is no meaning to his being perfect other than the existence of 
perfection for himself. Similarly, there is no meaning to his being self-
sufficient other than the existence in himself of the attributes that 
negate needs. How, then, are the attributes of perfection through which 
divinity is perfected denied through such verbal [acts] that arouse 
30 [sheer] imaginings?" 
(19) If it is said, "If you affirm an essence, and an attribute, and an 
inherence of the attribute in the essence, then this would constitute com­
position, and every composition requires a composer; and for this reason 
the First cannot be a body, because [the body] is composite," we say: 

Page 230: [No Text Extracted]

Page 231:
101 Discussion 6 
(20) One's statement, "Every composition requires a composer," is 
similar to his saying, "Every existent requires that which brings into 
existence." It is then further said to him: 
(21) "The First is an eternal existent that has neither a cause nor 
5 that which brings about [His] existence." Similarly, it is said: "He is an 
eternal [being] having attributes. There is neither a cause for His essence, 
[nor] for His attributes, nor for the subsistence of His attributes in His 
essence. Rather, all are eternal without a cause. As regards body, it is 
impossible for it to be the First because it is temporally created inasmuch 
10 as it is not devoid of temporal events. Anyone for whom the creation of 
the body is not established must—as we shall force as a necessary conse­
quence on you later on—allow that the first cause is a body." All their 
approaches in this problem are [things] that induce [mere] imaginings. 
(22) Moreover, they are unable to reduce all [the attributes] they 
15 affirm to the essence itself. For they affirm His being a knower, and this 
necessarily forces upon them [the admission] that this is [something] 
additional to pure existence. Thus, it would be said to them: "Do you 
admit that the First knows [anything] other than Himself?" Some admit 
this, while some maintain that He knows only Himself. 
20 (23) The first [of these two positions] is the one Avicenna chose. For 
he claimed that [God] knows all things in a universal kind [of knowing] 
that does not fall under time and that He does not know [those] particu­
lars the renewal of whose knowledge necessitates change in the essence 
of the knower. [To this] we say: 
25 (24) Is the First's knowledge of the existence of all the species and 
genera that are infinite identical with His knowledge of Himself, or is it 
[some] other [thing]? If you say that it is other, you would have affirmed 
plurality and contradicted the principle [of divine unity]. And if you say 
it is identical, then you arc no different from one who claims that man's 
30 knowledge of another is identical with his knowledge of himself and 
identical with himself. Whoever says this [is afflicted with] folly in his 
mind. [For] it is said: "The definition of one thing is that it is impossible 
to combine [its] negation and affirmation in the estimation." Hence, 
knowledge of one thing, since it is one thing, renders it impossible to sup-
35 pose in the estimation its existing and not existing at the same time. And 
since it is not impossible to suppose in the estimation man's knowledge of 

Page 232: [No Text Extracted]

Page 233:
102 Discussion 6 
himself without knowledge of another, it is said that his knowledge of 
another is other than his knowledge of himself, since, if it were identical, 
then denying [self-knowledge] would be a denial [of knowledge of the 
other] and affirming [the former] would be an affirmation [of the latter]. 
5 For it is impossible for Zayd to be existing and not existing—I mean, he, 
himself—at the same time, whereas this is not impossible with respect to 
knowledge of another and knowledge of oneself. 
(25) The same applies to the First's knowledge of Himself with 
respect to His knowledge of another, since it is possible to [suppose in 
10 the] estimation the existence of one without the other. Consequently, 
they are two things; whereas it is not possible to suppose in the estima­
tion the existence of His essence without the existence of His essence. 
If all [knowledge of self and knowledge of another] were thus [identical], 
then this estimative supposition would be impossible. Hence, all those 
15 among the philosophers who confess that the First knows what is other 
than Himself inevitably affirm plurality. 
(26) [The philosophers] may say: 
(27) He does not know the other by first intention. Rather, He knows 
Himself as the principle of all things, knowledge of the whole becoming 
20 necessary for Him by the second intention, since He can only know Him­
self as a principle. For this, in reality, is His essence. And He cannot know 
Himself as the principle for another without the other's becoming included 
in His knowledge by way of entailment and necessary consequence. It is 
not improbable that His essence should have necessary consequences, 
25 but this does not necessitate plurality in the quiddity of the self. What is 
impossible is only that there should be plurality in the very essence. 
(28) The answer to this is in [a number of J ways: 
(29) The first is that your statement that He knows Himself as 
a principle is arbitrary. Rather, He must know only the existence of 
30 Himself. As regards the knowledge of His being a principle, this is addi­
tional to knowledge of existence, because being a principle is a relation 
to the essence and it is possible [for Him] to know the essence without 
knowing its relation. If being a principle were not a relation, then His 
essence would be multiple and He would have existence and the [prop-
35 erty of] being a principle, and these are two things. And just as it is 
possible for a human to know himself without knowing himself to be an 
effect until he is taught [this], because being an effect is a relation he has 

Page 234: [No Text Extracted]

Page 235:
103 Discussion 6 
to his cause, similarly, [God's] being a cause is a relation He has to His 
effect. Thus, the necessary consequence [against them] remains stand­
ing in their mere saying that He knows Himself to be a principle, since 
it includes knowledge of the self and of being a principle, which is a 
5 relation. The relation is other than the self. Knowledge of the relation is 
other than knowledge of the self, [as shown] by the proof we have [just] 
mentioned—namely, that knowledge of the self without knowledge of 
being a principle can be supposed in the estimation—whereas one can­
not suppose in the estimation knowledge of the self without knowledge 
10 of the self, because the self is one. 
(30) The second way [of answering them] is that their statement 
that the whole is known to Him by the second intention is nonsensical 
speech. For as long as His knowledge encompasses another, just as it 
encompasses Himself, He would have two different objects of knowledge 
15 and He would have knowledge of both. The multiplicity and variance of 
what is known necessitates the multiplicity of knowledge, since one of the 
two objects of knowledge is amenable to separation from the other in 
one's estimation. Hence, knowledge of one of them would not be identi­
cal with knowledge of the other. For if this were the case, then it would 
20 not be possible to suppose the existence of the one without the other. 
Moreover, there would be no "other" as long as the whole [as they main­
tain] is one. Expressing [this] as "[knowledge] by the second intention" 
does not change anything. 
(31) Upon my word, how can one who says that "not even the weight 
25 of an atom in the heavens or the earth escapes His knowledge" [Qur°an 
10:61], except that He knows the whole by a universal kind [of knowing], 
have the audacity to deny plurality, when the universals known [to God] 
are infinite, [and to maintain that] the knowledge relating to them with 
their multiplicity and variety remains one in all respects? In this Avicenna 
30 has differed with other philosophers who, in order to safeguard against 
the consequence of plurality, have held that God knows only Himself. 
How, then, does he share with them their denial of plurality but disagree 
with them in affirming [God's] knowledge of other [things]? When he 
was ashamed that it should be said that God does not know anything 
35 at all in this world and the next, but knows only Himself, whereas 
another knows Him and also knows himself and others, thereby becom­
ing nobler than Him in knowledge, [Avicenna] forsook this [position], 
being embarrassed and repelled by this doctrine. But he was not 
ashamed in insisting on the denial of plurality in all respects, claiming 

Page 236: [No Text Extracted]

Page 237:
104 Discussion 6 
that [God's] knowledge of Himself and of others—indeed, of all things— 
constitutes His essence without any addition. This is the very contradic­
tion of which the rest of the philosophers were ashamed because of the 
manifest contradiction [in Avicenna's doctrine] at first reflection. Hence, 
5 no party among them is free from shame as regards his doctrine. This is 
what God does with those who stray from His path, thinking that the inner 
nature of divine matters is grasped by their reflection and imagination. 
(32) [The philosophers may] say: 
(33) If it is established that He knows Himself as a principle by way 
10 of relation, then the knowledge of what is related is one. For whoever 
knows the son knows him by one knowledge; and [this knowledge of 
what is related] includes by entailment knowledge of the father, of 
fatherhood, and [of] sonship. Thus, what is known becomes multiple, but 
knowledge remains one. Similarly, [God] knows Himself as the principle 
15 for others, knowledge remaining one even though what is known becomes 
multiple. If, then, this is rationally comprehended in the case of one 
effect and its relation to Him, this not necessitating plurality, then the 
increase in that whose genus does not necessitate plurality [in turn] does 
not necessitate plurality. Similarly, whoever knows a thing and knows 
20 his knowledge of the thing knows it with that [same] knowledge. Thus, 
every knowledge is knowledge of itself and of its object. The object of 
knowledge becomes multiple, while knowledge remains one. What also 
shows this is that you [theologians] perceive that the objects of God's 
knowledge are infinite, while His knowledge is one, and [you] attribute 
25 to Him cognitions that are infinite in number. If the multiplicity of what 
is known necessitates the multiplicity of the essence of knowledge, then 
let there be in the divine essence cognitions that are numerically infinite, 
which would be impossible. 
(34) [To this] we say: 
30 (35) As long as knowledge is one in every respect, then its attachment 
to two objects of knowledge is inconceivable. Rather, this exacts some 
multiplicity according to what the philosophers posit and [express in] 
their idiom when considering [the notion of] multiplicity—so [much so] 
that they exaggerate, saying: "If the First were to have a quiddity char-
35 acterized by existence,4 this would constitute multiplicity." They did not 

Page 238: [No Text Extracted]

Page 239:
105 Discussion 6 
deem it intelligible for one thing to have a reality to which thereafter 
existence is attributed but claimed that existence related to reality, being 
other than it, exacts multiplicity as its consequence. It is, then, in this 
way [we maintain] that one cannot suppose knowledge to be attached to 
5 many objects of knowledge without this necessitating in it a kind of mul­
tiplicity clearer and greater than what is necessitated by supposing an 
existence related to a quiddity. 
(36) As for knowledge of the son, and likewise the rest of the relations, 
this includes multiplicity. For there is no escape from knowing the essence 
10 of the son and the essence of the father, [this knowledge consisting of] 
two cognitions, and [having] a third knowledge—namely, [knowledge 
of] the relation. Yes, this third is entailed in the two previous cognitions, 
since these two are a condition and a necessary requirement for it. For, 
unless the related thing is first known, the relation is not known. These, 
15 then, are manifold cognitions, some conditioned by others. Similarly, if 
the First knows Himself as related to the rest of the genera and species 
by being a principle for them, He needs to know Himself and the indi­
vidual genera and to know His relation [to the latter] in terms of being 
a principle to them. Otherwise, the relation's being known to Him 
20 becomes unintelligible. 
(37) Regarding their statement that whoever knows a thing knows 
that he is a knower by virtue of that very knowledge, so that, while the 
object of his knowledge constitutes a plurality, knowledge remains one, 
this is not the case. Rather, he knows his being a knower by another 
25 knowledge [and so on] until this terminates in a knowledge of which he is 
oblivious and does not know. We do not say that this regresses ad infinitum 
but that it stops [at a point] with a knowledge relating to its object, where 
[the individual] is oblivious to the existence of the knowledge but not [to 
that] of the object known. This is similar to a person who knows black-
30 ness, being, in his state of knowing, psychologically absorbed with the 
object of his knowledge—namely, blackness—but unaware of his [act of] 
knowing blackness, paying no heed to it. If he pays heed to it, he will 
require another knowledge [and so on] until his heeding ceases. 
(38) As regards their saying, "This is turned against you regarding 
35 the objects of God's knowledge, for these are infinite, whereas knowl­
edge, according to you, is one," we say: 

Page 240: [No Text Extracted]

Page 241:
106 Discussion 6 
(39) We did not plunge into this book in the manner of those who 
introduce [what is constructive], but in the manner of those who are 
destroyers and objectors. For this reason we have named the book The 
Incoherence of the Philosophers, not The Introduction to Truth. Hence, it is not 
5 incumbent on us to answer this. 
(40) [The philosophers may] say: 
(41) We do not force upon you adherence to the doctrine of one 
specific sect. But that which turns against the rest of mankind, where 
all are equal in facing its difficulty, is not [something] you should be 
10 allowed to bring [against us]. This difficulty turns against you, and no 
sect can escape it. 
(42) We say: 
(43) No. What is intended is to show your impotence in your claim of 
knowing the true nature of things through conclusive demonstrations, 
15 and to shed doubt on your claims. Once your impotence becomes mani­
fest, then [one must point out that] there are among people those who hold 
that the realities of divine matters are not attained through rational 
reflection—indeed, that it is not within human power to know them. For 
this reason, the giver of the law has said: "Think on God's creation and 
20 do not think on God's essence." 
(44) What, then, is your disavowal of this group that believes the 
truth of the apostle through the proof of the miracle, that confines itself 
in intellectual judgment to prove the existence of the apostle, that avoids 
reflecting on the attributes by intellectual reflection, that follows the law-
25 giver in what he has revealed of God's attributes, that follows [the 
prophet's] example in using the terms "knower," "wilier," "powerful," and 
"living," that refrains from using those terms that have been prohibited, 
and that acknowledges the inability of the mind to apprehend [divine 
things]? You only disapprove of them by attributing to them ignorance of 
30 t he methods of demonstration and the manner of arranging the premises 
according to syllogistic figures, and by your claims that we have known 
[all] this through rational ways. But your impotence, the incoherence of 

Page 242: [No Text Extracted]

Page 243:
107 Discussion 6 
your ways, and the exposure [of your ignorance] in what you [claim to] 
know have become manifest. And [showing] this is what is intended in 
this explanatory discussion. Where, then, are those who claim that meta­
physical demonstrations are as conclusive as geometrical demonstrations? 
5 (45) [The philosophers may] say: 
(46) This difficulty is forced as a necessary consequence on Avicenna, 
inasmuch as he claimed that the First knows other [than Himself]. The 
exacting philosophers, however, have agreed that He knows only Himself. 
[With this] the difficulty is thus removed. 
10 (47) We say: 
(48) Sufficient is the shame on you with this doctrine. Had it not 
reached the limit in feebleness, the later [philosophers] would not have 
refrained from supporting it. We will [now] draw attention to the shame­
ful aspect in it. For it entails the rendering of [God's] effects better than 
15 He. For angel, man, and every one among the rational beings knows him­
self and his principle, and knows others, whereas the First knows only 
Himself. He is thus deficient in relation to individual people, to say noth­
ing of the angels. Indeed, the beasts, in addition to their awareness of 
themselves, know things other than themselves. There is no doubt that 
20 knowledge is nobility and its absence deficiency. Where, then, is their 
statement, "He is the Lover and the Beloved, because to Him belongs 
majesty most perfect and beauty most complete?" What beauty is there 
for an existence that is simple, having neither quiddity nor reality, that 
has no knowledge of what takes place in the world and no knowledge 
25 of what is necessitated by itself? And what deficiency in God's world is 
greater than this? 
(49) A rational person would indeed be astonished by a party that 
claims to delve deeply into [the world of] the intelligibles but whose reflec­
tion in the end leads to [the conclusion] that the Lord of Lords and the 
30 Cause of Causes has basically no knowledge of what occurs in the world. 
What difference is there between Him and the dead, except for His 
knowledge of Himself? And what perfection is there in His knowledge 
of Himself, with His ignorance of what is other than Himself? This is a 

Page 244: [No Text Extracted]

Page 245:
108 Discussion 6 
doctrine whose scandalous visage renders elaboration and clarification 
needless. Further, it is said to those, "You have also not escaped multiplic­
ity, in addition to your plunging into these shameful things." For we say: 
(50) Is His knowledge of Himself identical with Himself or other 
5 than Himself? If you say that it is other than Himself, then multiplicity 
comes about. If [on the other hand] you say that it is identical with 
Himself, then what difference is there between you and one who says 
that a human's knowledge of himself is identical with himself? This is 
foolishness. For the existence of himself in a state where he is unaware 
10 of himself is conceivable. His unawareness thereafter ceases, and he 
becomes awakened to himself. Hence, his awareness of himself becomes 
necessarily other than himself. If, however, you say, "A human may be 
devoid of the knowledge of himself, and then [self-knowledge] would 
occur to him so that his awareness of himself would necessarily be other 
15 than himself," we say: 
(51) Otherness is known neither through occurrence nor [through] 
connection. For the identical thing cannot occur to the [identical] thing. 
When that which is other than the thing connects with the thing, it does 
not become identical with it and does not cease to be another. That the 
20 First should be eternally knowing Himself does not prove that His knowl­
edge of Himself is identical with Himself. The estimative [power] is wide 
enough [to allow] postulating [the existence of] the [divine] essence 
[by itself] and then the occurrence of [God's] awareness [of Himself]. 
If [this awareness] were identical with the [divine] essence itself, then 
25 this estimative act [of hypothesizing essence and awareness of essence 
separately] would have been inconceivable. 
(52) If it is said, "His essence is intellect and knowledge; hence, He does 
not possess an essence [and] then a knowledge subsisting in it," we say: 
(53) The folly is obvious in this speech. For knowledge is an attribute 
30 and an accident that requires that to which the attribute is ascribed. The 
statement of someone that [God] in His essence is intellect and knowl­
edge is the same as his saying that He is power and will; [the latter] would 
then be self-subsisting. If this is upheld, then it is akin to someone's state­
ment concerning blackness and whiteness, that [they] are self-subsistent; 
35 and, with respect to quantity, squareness, and three-foldness, that [they] 
are self-subsistent. The same holds with all the accidents. [Now,] in the 
way that it is impossible for the attributes of bodies to be self-subsistent 
without a body which is other than the attributes, in [this very] same way 
it is known that the attributes of the living by way of knowledge, life, 

Page 246: [No Text Extracted]

Page 247:
109 Discussion 6 
power, and will are also not self-subsistent but subsist in an essence. Life 
then subsists in an essence. [God's] life would, hence, be through [the 
attribute of life]. The same applies to the rest of [the divine] attributes. 
(54) Consequently, [the philosophers] are not content with denying 
5 the First the rest of the attributes, nor with denying Him reality and 
quiddity, but have reached the point of denying Him self-subsistence, 
reducing Him to the realities of accidents and attributes that have no 
self-subsistence. Nonetheless, we will, after this, in a separate discussion, 
show their inability to prove His being a knower of Himself and of others. 

Page 248: [No Text Extracted]

Page 249:
[Seventh] Discussion 
On refuting their statement that the First cannot 
share with another in terms of genus and differ from 
it in differentia—that an intellectual division in 
terms of genus and differentia never frequents to Him 
(1) They have agreed on this, building on it [the argument] that, if 
[the First] does not share a generic meaning with another, He also does 
not differ from it in terms of a differential meaning. Hence, He has no 
definition, since definition is formed in terms of genus and differentia. 
5 And that which has no composition has no definition and [according to 
them] this [namely, having genus and difference] is a kind of composition. 
(2) They [further] claimed that the statement of someone that He 
equals the first effect in being an existent, a substance, and a cause of 
another and necessarily differs from it in another thing does not constitute 
10 generic participation but participation in [what is] a necessary common 
concomitant. There is a difference between genus and the necessary con­
comitant in reality, even if they did not differ in commonness, as is 
known in logic. For the essential genus is the common predicate in the 
answer [to the question], "What is it?" and is included in the quiddity 
15 of the defined thing and is a giver of substance to its essence. Thus, a 
human's being animate is included in the quiddity of the human—I 
mean animality—and is therefore a genus. His being born and created is 
a concomitant of his, never separating from him, but is not included in 
the quiddity, even though it is a common concomitant. This is known 
20 in logic in a manner that is indisputable. 
-110-

Page 250: [No Text Extracted]

Page 251:
/// Discussion 7 
(3) Moreover, they claimed that existence is never included in the 
quiddity of things but is related to the quiddity either as a concomitant 
that never separates, as with heaven, or as occurring after not being, as 
with temporal things. Hence, participation in existence is not participa-
5 tion in a genus. As regards [God's] participation in being a cause of 
another, as with the rest of the causes, this is participation in a necessary 
relation that is also not included in the quiddity. For neither being a 
principle nor [being in] existence substantiates the essence, but [both 
become] necessary concomitants of the essence after the substantiation 
10 of the essence by the parts of its quiddity. Hence, participation in it is 
nothing but the participation in a common concomitant whose necessity 
is consequent on the essence, its necessary concomitance not being in 
[terms of] genus. For this reason, things are not defined except in terms 
of matters that substantiate [them]. If defined through [their] necessary 
15 concomitants, this would constitute a description' for the purpose of dif­
ferentiation, not for the purpose of giving a conception of the reality of 
the thing. Thus, it is not said regarding the definition of the triangle that 
it is that whose angles are equal to two right angles, even though this is 
a necessary concomitant of every triangle; but it is said that it is a figure 
20 encompassed by three straight lines. 
(4) It is the same with participation in His being a substance. For the 
meaning of His being a substance is that He does not exist in a subject. 
Existence is not a genus. That something negative is related to it— 
namely, that it is not in a subject—does not make [existence] become 
25 a substantiating genus. Indeed, if [something positive]2 were related to 
it and it is said that it exists in a subject, it would not become a genus 
in terms of being an accident. This is because whoever knows a substance 
by its definition, which is like a description to it—namely, that it does not 
exist in a subject—does not know that it exists, to say nothing of its either 
30 being in a subject or not [being] in a subject. Rather, the meaning of our 
statement in describing the substance is that it is the existent not in a 
subject—that is, that it is some reality which, if it comes into existence, 
comes to exist not in a subject. We do not mean by it that it actually 
exists at the time in which it is being defined. Hence, the participation in 
35 it is not the participation in a genus. 
(5) Rather, participation in the things substantiating the quiddity is 
participation in the genus, requiring thereafter differentiation through 

Page 252: [No Text Extracted]

Page 253:
112 Discussion 7 
a differentia. There is no quiddity for the First other than necessary 
existence. Necessary existence is in itself a true nature and a quiddity; 
it belongs to Him, not to another. If, then, necessary existence belongs 
only to Him, then He does not share [it] with another; hence, He is not 
5 differentiated from [the other] by a specific differentia. Consequently, 
He has no definition. 
(6) This, then, is the explanation of their doctrine. The reply to it is 
in two respects: a demand and a refutation. 
(7) Regarding the demand, it consists of saying: "This is [merely] the 
10 relating of the doctrine. But how3 do you know the impossibility of this 
with respect to the First so as to have built on it the denial of duality, when 
you said that [the] second [existent—namely, His first effect—]would 
have to share one thing with Him and differ in another, and that what­
ever contains that by means of which sharing and differentiating takes 
15 place is composite, and the composite [with the First] is impossible?" 
(8) We [further] say: 
(9) Whence do you know the impossibility of this kind of composition? 
There is no proof for it other than your statement, reported of you, in 
your denial of the attributes—namely, that [whatever] is composed of 
20 genus and differentia is an aggregate of parts, so that, if it is true for one 
of the parts or for the whole to exist without the other, then [what is 
independent] is the necessary existent and not anything else; and, if 
it is not true for either the parts to exist without the aggregate or the 
aggregate without the parts, then the whole is caused and is in need [of 
25 a cause]. We have spoken of this in [discussing] the attributes and have 
shown that this [namely, the existence of uncaused attributes] is not ren­
dered impossible by terminating the regress of causes, and that demon­
stration only proved the termination of regress. 
(10) As for the great things which they invented concerning the 
30 necessity of attributing [composition] to the Necessary Existent, there 
is no proof to demonstrate it. If, then, the Necessary Existent is [the 
being] they described—namely, that there is no multiplicity in Him, so 
that He does not need another for His subsistence—there is no proof for 
establishing the Necessary Existent. Proof shows only the termination 
35 of [the causal] regress. This is [something] we have finished with in 
[discussing] the attributes. In this kind [of argument] it is more obvious. 
For the division of a thing into genus and difference is not the same as the 
division of that which has an attribute into an essence and an attribute. 

Page 254: [No Text Extracted]

Page 255:
113 Discussion 7 
The attribute is other than the essence, and the essence is other than the 
attribute, whereas the species is not other than the genus in all respects. 
Thus, whenever we mention the species, we mention the genus and an 
addition. When we mention man, we are not mentioning anything but 
5 animal with the additional rationality. Hence, someone's question, "Does 
humanity dispense with animality?" is similar to someone's asking, 
"Does humanity dispense with itself when something else is added to it?" 
This is more removed from multiplicity than the attribute and the thing 
to which it is attributed. 
10 (11) In what respect is it impossible for the chain of effects to termi­
nate with two causes—one of the two being the cause of the heavens 
[and] the other the cause of the elements, or one of the two being the 
cause of intellects [and] the other being the cause of all bodies—and 
that there should be between them a difference and a separation in 
15 meaning, as there is between redness and heat in the same place? For 
[the latter] differ in meaning, without our supposing that there is in red­
ness a generic and differential composition such that it4 is receptive of 
separation. Rather, should there be multiplicity in it, it would be a kind 
of multiplicity that does not violate the unity of the essence. In what 
20 respect, then, is this impossible [in the case of] causes? With this, their 
inability to deny two creating gods becomes clear. 
(12) [It maybe] said: 
(13) This is impossible, inasmuch as, if that through which there is a 
difference between the two essences constitutes a condition for necessary 
25 existence, then it must exist for every necessary existent; hence, the two 
will not differ. But if neither this nor the other [namely, a difference that 
is not a condition] constitutes a condition, then the existence of that 
which is not a condition for necessary existence becomes dispensable, 
and the necessity of existence is fulfilled by [what is] other than [it].5 
30 (14) [To this] we say: 
(15) This is the very thing you mentioned with respect to the attri­
butes, and we have [already] discussed it. The source of the obfuscation 
in all this lies in the expression "the necessary existent." Let [the expres­
sion] be cast aside. For we do not admit that proof proves the "necessary 
35 existent," unless what is meant by it is an existent that has no agent [and 

Page 256: [No Text Extracted]

Page 257:
114 Discussion 7 
is] eternal. If this is what is intended, then let the expression "necessary 
existent" be abandoned and let it be shown that it is impossible for an 
existent that has no cause or agent to have in it multiplicity and fattribu-
tional] differentiation. But there is no proof for this. There thus remains 
5 their question: "Is this [difference between the supposed uncaused 
causes] not a condition for its not having a cause?" But this is madness. 
For we have shown [that, in the case of] that which has no cause, its 
being without a cause is not causally explained so as to have its condition 
sought after. This is akin to saying: "Is blackness a condition for color 
10 to be color and, if a condition, then why would redness be a color?" To this 
it would be answered that, as regards the reality [of color], neither 
[blackness nor redness] is made a condition—that is, [for] establishing 
the reality of being a color in the mind. In [external] existence, however, 
the condition would be one of the two [or any other color], but not 
15 specifically [one and not the other]. In other words, there can be no genus 
in [external] existence but that which must have a differentia. The same 
applies to whoever affirms two causes and terminates the regress with 
the two. He would thus say: "They are separated through a differentia, and 
one of the differentiae is necessarily a condition for [external] existence; 
20 but [this must] not [be confined] to [one] specific [differentia]." 
(16) It may be said: 
(17) This is possible in the case of color. For it has an existence related 
to the quiddity [and] additional to the quiddity. This, however, is not pos­
sible with the Necessary Existent, since nothing belongs to Him other 
25 than the necessity of existence, there being no quiddity to which existence 
is added. And just as the differentia blackness and the differentia redness 
are not conditions for color in being color, but only for its existence that 
comes about through a cause, similarly, no condition must be made for 
necessary existence. For the necessity of existence is for the First as 
30 being a color6 is to a color, not as existence that is related to being color. 
(18) We say: 
(19) We do not admit [this]. Rather, He has a reality which is char­
acterized by existence, as we shall show in the discussion following this 
one. Their statement that He is existence without quiddity is beyond 
35 [what is] intelligible. The sum of the discussion is that they have based 
the denial of duality on the denial of generic and differential composition 
and then built this on the denial of quiddity behind [God's] existence. 

Page 258: [No Text Extracted]

Page 259:
115 Discussion 7 
Thus, once we refute the last, which is the foundation of the foundation, 
the whole becomes refuted. This is a structure that is weak in its stand­
ing, similar to a spider's web. 
(20) The second way [of answering the philosophers] is forcing on 
5 them necessarily [an absurd consequence]. This consists of our saying: 
"If existence, substantiality, and being a principle is not a genus because 
it is not [that of which something is] said in the answer to 'What is it?', the 
First [nonetheless] is, according to you, an intellect denuded [of matter], 
just as the rest of the intellects that are principles for existence—named 
10 'angels,' according to them—and that are the effects of the First are 
[also] intellects denuded of matter. This reality pervades the First and 
His first effect. For the first effect is also simple, having no composition 
in itself, except with respect to its necessary concomitants. Both share, in 
that each is of them is an intellect denuded of matter. But this is a generic 
15 reality. For being an intellect denuded [of matter] is not, with respect to 
the essence, one of the necessary concomitants but is the quiddity. This 
quiddity is a common thing shared between the First and the rest of the 
[celestial] intellects. If He does not differ from them through some other 
thing, then you [philosophers] would have conceived duality without 
20 there being a difference. If He differs, then that through which the 
difference obtains is other than that which constitutes sharing and being 
intellect. The sharing in [this] is in reality a sharing. For the First appre­
hended Himself intellectually and apprehended another (for those 
who hold this) inasmuch as He is, in Himself, mind denuded of matter. 
25 Similarly, the first effect, which is the first intellect, which God creates 
without mediation, shares [with God] in this meaning. The proof of this 
is that the [celestial] intellects that are effects constitute different species, 
sharing in being intellect and differing through differences other than this. 
Similarly, the First shares with all [these intellects] in being intellect." 
30 [The philosophers] are thus [caught] between [two things:] either con­
tradicting the principle [of divine uniqueness], or else coming to [uphold 
the view] that being intellect does not substantiate the essence. Both of 
these, according to them, are impossible. 

Page 260: [No Text Extracted]

Page 261:
[Eighth] Discussion 
On refuting their statement that the existence of 
the First is simple—that is, that He is pure existence, 
and that there is no quiddity or reality to which 
existence is related, but that necessary existence is 
for Him akin to a quiddity for another 
The discourse against this is in two respects. 
(1) The first is to demand a proof. It is thus asked, "How do you know 
this? By [rational] necessity or through reflection?" This, however, is not 
[known by rational] necessity; hence, the method of reflection would 
5 have to be mentioned. 
(2) If [then] it is said, "This is because, if [God] has a quiddity, then 
existence would be related to it, consequent on it, and a necessary con­
comitant of it; but the consequence is an effect, and necessary existence 
would thus be an effect—but this is contradictory," we say: 
10 (3) This is a return to the source of the confusion in using the expres­
sion "necessary existence." For we say [that] He has a reality and a quid­
dity. This reality exists—that is, it is not nonexistent [or] negated, and its 
existence is related to it. If [the philosophers] want to call [this existence] 
consequent and necessary concomitant, then there is no quarrel in names 
15 once it is known that there is no agent for [His] existence, but that this 
existence continues to be pre-eternal without [having] an efficient cause. 
If, however, they mean by "the consequent" and "the effect" that it has 
an efficient cause, this is not the case. If they mean something else, this 
is conceded; and there is nothing impossible in it, since proof has only 
20 shown the termination of the regress of causes. Its termination in an 
-116-

Page 262: [No Text Extracted]

Page 263:
117 Discussion 8 
existing reality and a fixed quiddity is possible. Hence, there is no need 
in this for the negation of quiddity. 
(4) If it is said, "The quiddity then becomes a cause of the existence 
which is consequent on Him,1 existence becoming caused and enacted," 
5 we say: 
(5) The quiddity in created things is not a cause of existence; how, 
then, [can this be] in the case of [what is] pre-eternal, if they mean by 
"cause" that which enacts it? If they mean by ["cause"] some other 
facet—namely, that [existence] does not dispense with it2—let this be 
10 the case, since there is no impossibility in [this]. The impossibility is only 
in the [infinite] regress of causes. If the regress is terminated, then the 
impossibility is prevented. The impossibility of other than this is not 
known. Hence, there is a necessary need for a demonstration [to show] 
its impossibility. But all their "demonstrations" are arbitrary [matters] 
15 built on taking the expression "necessary existent" in a sense that has 
necessary consequences [following from it] and on the acceptance that 
proof has demonstrated a necessary existent having the quality they 
attributed to it. But this is not the case, as previously [shown]. 
(6) In brief, their proof in this goes back to their proof denying [the 
20 divine] attributes and their denial of generic and specific division [in the 
divine], except that it is more obscure and weaker. [This] is because this 
multiplicity reduces only to sheer verbal utterance. Otherwise, the mind 
accommodates the supposition of one (divine] existing quiddity, whereas 
[the philosophers] say that every existing quiddity is a plurality, since it 
25 includes quiddity and existence. 
(7) But this is the ultimate in waywardness. For the existent which is 
one is intelligible, whatever [the] state [one attributes to it]. There is never 
an existent without a real [nature], and the existence of a real [nature] 
does not negate unity. 
30 (8) The second way is for us to say: 
(9) Existence without quiddity and a real [nature] is unintelligible. 
And just as we do not comprehend an unattached nonexistence, but only 
[one] in relation to an existent whose nonexistence is supposed, we do not 

Page 264: [No Text Extracted]

Page 265:
118 Discussion 8 
comprehend an unattached existence, but only in relation to a determi­
nate real [nature], particularly if it is determined as one entity. How, 
then, is one thing that differs from another in meaning determined, 
when no real [nature] belongs to it? For the negation of quiddity is 
5 a negation of a real [nature]; and if the real [nature] of an existent 
is negated, existence becomes incomprehensible. It is as though [the 
philosophers] have said, "[There is] existence without [there being] an 
existent," which is contradictory. 
(10) What proves this is that if this were intelligible, then there could 
10 be among caused things an existent that shares with the First in being 
[an existent] that has neither a real [nature] nor a quiddity, differing 
from [the First] in that it has a cause, whereas the First has no cause. 
Why is this inconceivable in effects? Does it have a cause other than its 
being in itself unintelligible? And that which in itself is unintelligible 
15 does not become intelligible through the denial of its cause. And what is 
intelligible does not cease to be intelligible by supposing for it a cause. 
(11) Their going to such an extreme is the ultimate in [their wallow­
ing in] their darkness. For they thought that they are elevating [God 
above all similitudes to His creation] in what they say, but the end result 
20 of their discourse is pure negation. For the denial of the quiddity is 
the denial of reality. Nothing remains with the denial of reality save the 
verbal utterance "existence," having basically no referent when not 
related to a quiddity. 
(12) If it is said, "His reality consists in His being necessary, and 
25 [this] is [His] quiddity," we say: 
(13) There is no meaning for [His being] necessary other than the 
denial of [a] cause [for His existence]. This [denial] is [pure] negation, 
through which the reality of an essence is not established. Denying the 
cause for [God's] reality is a necessary concomitant of [this] reality. Let, 
30 then, reality be [something] intelligible so as to be described as having 
no cause and [as something] whose nonexistence is inconceivable, since 
there is no other meaning for "necessity" except this. However, if neces­
sity is [something] additional to existence, then multiplicity [in the 
divine] would ensue; and, if not additional, [which must be the case,] 
35 how can it be the quiddity when existence is not a quiddity? Such is the 
case with whatever is not additional to existence.3 

Page 266: [No Text Extracted]

Page 267:
[Ninth] Discussion 
On showing their inability to sustain 
a proof that the First is not a body 
(1) We say: "[The proof that God is not a body] would only pro­
ceed correctly for someone who perceives [(a)] that the body is tempo­
rally originated, inasmuch as it is not devoid of temporal events, and 
[(b)] that every temporal event requires an originator." But if you 
5 [philosophers are able to] apprehend intellectually an eternal body 
whose existence has no beginning, even though it is not devoid of 
temporal events, why would it then be impossible for the First to be a 
body—either the sun, the outermost sphere, or some other thing? 
(2) [To this it may be] said: 
10 (3) [This is] because body [can] only be composite, divisible into two 
parts quantitatively: into matter and form in terms of conceptual divi­
sion, and into descriptions necessarily proper to it, so as to differ from 
other bodies—for [all] bodies, in being bodies, are otherwise similar. But 
the Necessary Existent is one and is not receptive of divisions in [any of] 
15 these respects. 
(4) We say: 
(5) We have refuted this against you and have shown that you have 
no proof for it except [to argue] that if parts of the composite are in need 
of the [other] parts, then it is caused. We have discussed this, showing 
20 that if the supposition of an existent that does not have that which brings 
-119-

Page 268: [No Text Extracted]

Page 269:
120 Discussion 9 
about its existence is not improbable, then the supposition of a composite 
that has no composer and the supposition of [many] existents without a 
cause of their existence1 are [likewise] not improbable—[this] since you 
have built the denial of number and duality on the denial of composition, 
5 and the denial of composition on the denial of a quiddity [that is other] 
than existence. And [the latter], which is the final foundation [of your 
argument, is something] we had uprooted, showing your arbitrariness in 
[affirming it]. 
(6) If it is said, "If body has no soul, it would not be an active agent; 
10 and if it has a soul, then the soul would be a cause of it and it would not 
be 'a first,'" we say: 
(7) Our soul is not a cause for the existence of our bodies, nor is the 
soul of the celestial [sphere] by itself a cause for the existence of its body, 
according to you; rather, both exist through a cause that is other than 
15 both. If the eternal existence of both is allowed, then the nonexistence 
of a cause for either becomes allowed. 
(8) If it is then asked, "How did the joining of soul and body happen 
[to come about]?" we say: 
(9) This is like someone saying, "How did the existence of the First 
20 happen?" to which it would be said, "This is a question [applicable to] an 
originated thing. But as regards [the Being] who has never ceased to 
exist, one does not say, 'How did [His existence] happen?' The same 
applies to the body and its soul: if each continues to exist [from eternity], 
then why is it unlikely that [each] is a creator?" 
25 (10) If it is said, "This is because body qua body does not create 
another; and the soul that is attached to the body only acts through the 
mediation of the body, the body [never] being an intermediary for the 
soul in the creating of bodies or the originating of souls and things not 
appropriate to bodies," we say: 
30 (11) Why is it not allowable that there exists among souls a soul char­
acterized with a property through which it becomes predisposed to have 
bodies and nonbodies come into being from it? The impossibility of this is 
not known as a [rational] necessity, and there is no demonstration to 
prove it. The only thing is that it has not been observed among these 
35 observable [bodies]. Nonobservation does not prove impossibility. For [the 
philosophers] have related to the First Existent that which is not related 
to an existent at all and [that which] we have not observed in [existents] 

Page 270: [No Text Extracted]

Page 271:
121 Discussion 9 
other than Him. The absence of observing [this] in others does not prove 
that it is impossible in His case. The same [can be argued] in the case of 
the body's soul and the body. 
(12) If it is said, "The furthermost sphere, the sun, or whatever body 
5 is supposed has been specified with a quantity that can be increased or 
decreased, so that its specification with that possible quantity is in need 
of something that specifies it with it, and [hence such a body] would not 
be 'a first,'" we say: 
(13) With what [argument] would you deny one who says that that 
10 body would have a quantity which it must necessarily have [as required 
by] the order of the whole [world], and that, if it were smaller or larger, 
[this] would be impossible? This is similar to what you have said: [namely,] 
that the outermost sphere emanates from the first effect, being quan­
tified by [a certain] quantity, when all other quantities relative to the 
15 essence of the first effect are equal, but that a certain quantity was 
specified because the [world] order is connected to it. Hence, the quan­
tity that came about is necessary, its contrary not allowable. The same 
would be the case if [the celestial body] is supposed to be uncaused. 
Indeed, if [the philosophers] affirm for the first effect—which to them is 
20 the cause of (he outermost sphere—a principle of specification such as the 
will, for example, the question does not cease. For then, in the same way 
that [the philosophers] forced on Muslims the question of the relation 
of things to the eternal will, it would be said: "Why did [the principle] 
will this quantity and not any other?" We have turned their argument 
25 against them with respect to specifying the direction of the movement of 
the heaven and the assigning [of] the two spherical nodes.2 
(14) If, then, it has become clear that they are compelled to allow the 
differentiating of one thing from its [exact] similar when [the differenti­
ation] is due to a cause, [it follows] that allowing [the differentiation] 
30 when not due to a cause is similar to allowing it when due to a cause. For 
there is no difference in directing the question to that very thing when 
it is asked, "Why is it specified with this quantity?" and in directing it 
to the cause when it is asked, "Why did it specify it with this quantity 
and not with a similar one?" For, if it is possible to answer the question 
35 regarding the cause by [arguing] that the [assigned] quantity is not like 
another, since the world order is connected with it and not with any 
other, it would [also] be possible to answer the question [in the same 
way] about the thing itself, where [the differentiation] needs no cause. 
There is no escape [for them] from this. For, if this specific quantity that 

Page 272: [No Text Extracted]

Page 273:
122 Discussion 9 
occurs is similar to that which did not occur, the question [continues] to 
be posed, [namely:] "How is something distinguished from its similar?" 
particularly in terms of their [own] principle when they deny a will that 
differentiates [between similars]. If [on the other hand] it is not similar 
5 to it, the possibility [of an alternative quantity] does not hold. Rather, it 
would be said that [the quantity] came about in this way pre-eternally, in 
the same way that the cause, as they claim, came about pre-eternally. 
Let the person who reflects on this discussion draw on what we have 
brought against [the philosophers] in directing the question regarding 
10 the eternal will and our turning the matter against them in the case of 
the node and the direction of the movement of the sphere. 
(15) From this it becomes clear that whoever does not believe in the 
temporal origination of bodies is fundamentally incapable of erecting a 
proof that the First is not a body. 

Page 274: [No Text Extracted]

Page 275:
[Tenth] Discussion 
On their inability to show that 
the world has a maker and a cause 
(1) We say: 
(2) [When] those who maintain that every body is temporally origi­
nated because it is never devoid of temporal events state that [the world] 
needs a maker and a cause, their doctrine is intelligible. But as for you 
5 [philosophers], what is there to prevent you from [upholding] the doc­
trine of the materialists—namely, that the world is eternal, that it like­
wise has no cause and no maker, that only temporal events have a cause, 
that no body in the world is originated and no body annihilated, but 
| that] what occurs temporally is forms and accidents? For [according to 
10 this doctrine] the bodies consist of the heavens, which are eternal, [and] 
the four elements constituting the stuff of the sublunar sphere. The bodies 
and materials [of the latter] are [likewise] eternal. It is only that the 
forms, through mixtures and transformations, undergo successive change 
over [these bodies]; the human and the vegetative souls come into tem-
15 poral existence. The causes of [all] these [temporal] events terminate in 
the circular motion, the circular motion being eternal, its source an eter­
nal soul of the heavens. Hence, [according to the materialists] there is no 
cause for the world and no maker of its bodies, but it continues eternally 
to be in the manner that it is, without a cause (I mean, [without a cause 
20 of its] bodies). What, then, is the sense of their saying that these bodies 
come into being through a cause, when [such bodies] are eternal? 
(3) If it is said, "Whatever has no cause is necessary of existence, and 
we have made a statement concerning those attributes of the Necessary 
-123-

Page 276: [No Text Extracted]

Page 277:
124 Discussion 10 
Existent through which it was shown that body cannot be a necessary 
existent," we say: 
(4) We have shown the falsity of what you have claimed concerning 
the attributes of the Necessary Existent [and have shown] that demon-
5 stration only proves the termination of the [causal] series. And this, for 
the materialist, has already terminated at the outset. For he states that 
bodies have no cause and that, as regards forms and accidents, [these] 
cause each other, until [such causes and effects] reach the circular motion 
[of the heavens], parts of which [in turn] are causes of [other] parts (as it 
10 is with the doctrine of the philosophers), the regress [of the series of the 
causes of forms and accidents] terminating [with the circular motion]. 
Whoever reflects on what we have said will know the inability of the one 
who believes in the eternity of bodies to claim for them a cause; and the 
necessary consequence for him is materialism and atheism, as openly 
15 declared by a group. For these [latter] are the ones who [in reality] have 
fulfilled the requirements of the speculation of [the philosophers]. 
(5) If it is said, "The proof of this is that these bodies are either nec­
essary in existence, which is impossible, or [that they are] possible [in 
existence], and every possible is in need of a cause," we say: 
20 (6) The expression "necessary existent" and the expression "possible 
existent" are incomprehensible. All their obfuscations are hidden in these 
two expressions. Let us, then, turn to what is comprehensible—namely, 
the negation or affirmation of the cause. It would then be as though they 
ask, "Do these bodies have a cause or do they not have a cause?" To this 
25 the materialist replies, "They have no cause." What is [so] disavowable 
in this? If, then, this is what is meant by possibility, we [disagree and] say, 
"[Body] is necessary and not contingent." Their statement that it is not 
possible for body to be necessary is arbitrary and groundless. 
(7) If it is said, "It is undeniable that body has parts and that the 
30 aggregate is substantiated by the parts and that the parts essentially 
precede the aggregate,"1 we say: 
(8) Let this be the case. The aggregate, then, is substantiated by 
the parts and their combination—there being no cause, however, for the 
parts or their combination. Rather, these are likewise eternal, having no 
35 efficient cause. They are unable to refute this except with what they had 
mentioned of the necessity of denying multiplicity in the First Existent. 
But we have refuted this, and they have no other way [to argue for their 
position] except it. 
(9) Hence, it has become clear that whoever does not believe in the 
40 creation of bodies has no basis whatsoever for his belief in the maker. 

Page 278: [No Text Extracted]

Page 279:
[Eleventh] Discussion 
On showing the impotence of those among them 
who believe that the First knows other[s] and 
knows the genera and species in a universal way 
(1) We say: 
(2) Inasmuch as existence for the Muslims1 is confined to the tempo­
rally originated and the eternal, there being for them no eternal other 
than God and His attributes, [all things] other than Him being originated 
5 from His direction through His will, a necessary premise regarding His 
knowledge became realized for them. For that which is willed must nec­
essarily be known to the wilier. On this they built [the argument] that 
everything is known to Him because all [things] are willed by Him and 
originated by His will. Hence, there is no generated being that is not orig-
10 inated by His will, nothing remaining [uncreated] except Himself. And 
as long as it is established that He is a wilier, knowing what He wills, 
He is necessarily a living being. And with any living being that knows 
another, knowing himself takes priority. Hence, for [Muslims] all exis-
tents are known to God, and they came to know this in this way after it 
15 became evident to them that He wills the temporal origination of the 
world. As for you [philosophers], if you claim the world to be pre-eternal, 
not originated through His will,2 how, then, do you know that He knows 
[what is] other than Himself? A proof for this is necessary. 
(3) The sum of what Avicenna mentioned in ascertaining this in the 
20 course of his discussion reduces to two sorts [of argument]. 
-125-

Page 280: [No Text Extracted]

Page 281:
V 126 
n. Discussion 11 
(4) The first sort [of argument consists in saying] that the First does 
not exist in matter: whatever does not exist in matter is a pure intellect, 
and whatever is pure intellect has all the intelligibles laid bare to it.3 For 
the impediment to apprehending all things is attachment to matter and 
5 preoccupation with it. The soul of the human being is preoccupied with 
managing matter—that is, the body. Once [the human's] preoccupation 
[with the body] ceases with death, [the individual,] not having been tar­
nished by bodily appetites and base qualities that come to him from 
natural things, has the realities of all the intelligibles unveiled to him. 
10 For this reason, [Avicenna] adjudged it that all the angels know all the 
intelligibles, nothing escaping them, since they, too, are pure intellects, 
not existing in matter. 
(5) [To this] we say: 
(6) If, by your statement that the First does not exist in matter, it is 
15 meant that He is neither body nor imprinted in a body, but, rather, that He 
is self-subsistent without being spatial or specified with spatial position, 
this is admitted. There remains your statement that that which has this 
description is a pure intellect. What, then, do you mean by "intellect"? If 
you mean by it that which apprehends intellectually the rest of things, 
20 this would be the very thing sought after and the point at dispute. How, 
then, did you include it in the premises of the syllogism for [establishing] 
what is being sought after? If you mean by it something else—namely, 
that it apprehends itself intellectually—some of your philosopher breth­
ren may concede this to you, but it amounts to saying that whatever 
25 conceives itself conceives another, in which case it would be asked, "Why 
do you claim this, when it is not necessary?" This is [something] which 
Avicenna held, setting himself apart from the rest of the philosophers. 
How, then, do you claim it to be necessary? If it is [attained through] 
reflection, what demonstration is there for it?4 
30 (7) If it is then said, "This is because the impediment to the appre­
hension of things is matter, but [here] there is no matter," we say: 
(8) We concede that it is an impediment, but we do not concede that 
it is the only impediment. Their syllogism is ordered according to the form 
of the conditional syllogism—namely, in saying: "If this is in matter, then 
35 it does not apprehend things intellectually. It is not in matter. Therefore, 

Page 282: [No Text Extracted]

Page 283:
127 Discussion 11 
it apprehends things intellectually." This [way of arguing] consists in 
adding the contradictory of the antecedent.5 But, as all agree,6 adding 
the contradictory of the antecedent does not yield a valid conclusion. 
This is similar to one's saying: "If this is a human, then it is an animal. 
5 It is not a human. Therefore, it is not an animal." But this does not follow. 
For it may not be a human, but a horse, whereby it would be an animal. 
(9) Yes, [it is true that] repeating the antecedent negatively would 
yield the consequent as a valid conclusion, as mentioned in logic, [but] 
with a condition—namely, establishing the convertibility of the conse-
10 quent and the antecedent through restriction. An example of this is 
their saying: "If the sun has risen, then it is daytime. But the sun has not 
risen. Therefore, it is not daytime." This is [valid] because the existence of 
daytime has no other cause than the rising of the sun. Hence, each 
[namely, antecedent and consequent] is convertible to the other. The 
15 showing of these modes and terms is explained in the book The Standard 
for Knowledge, which we have composed and appended to this book. 
(10) If it is said, "We claim convertibility—namely, in that the imped­
iment is restricted to matter, there being no impediment other than it," 
we say: 
20 (11) This is arbitrary assertion. Where is the proof for it? 
(12) The second sort [of argument] is [Avicenna's] statement: "Even 
though we did not say that the First wills origination nor that the whole 
[world] is temporally originated, we [nonetheless] say that [the world] is 
His act and has come to existence through Him, except that He contin-
25 ucs to have the attribute of [those who are] agents and, hence, is ever 
enacting. We differ from others only to this extent. But as far as the basis 
of the act is concerned, [the answer is,] 'No.' And if the agent's having 
knowledge of His act is necessary, as all agree, then the whole, according 
to us, is due to His act." 
30 (13) The answer [to this] is in two respects. 
I 

Page 284: [No Text Extracted]

Page 285:
128 Discussion 11 
(14) The first is that action divides into two [kinds]: voluntary, like 
the action of animal[s] and human[s], and natural, like the action of the 
sun in shedding light, fire in heating, and water in cooling. Knowledge 
of the act is only necessary in the voluntary act, as in the human arts. 
5 As regards natural action, [the answer is,] "No." [Now,] according to you 
[philosophers], God enacted the world by way of necessity from His 
essence, by nature and compulsion, not byway of will and choice. Indeed, 
the whole [of the world] follows necessarily from His essence in the way 
that light follows necessarily from the sun. And just as the sun has no 
10 power to stop light and fire [has no power] to stop heating, the First has 
no power to stop His acts, may He be greatly exalted above what they 
say. This mode [of expression], [even] if metaphorically named an "act," 
does not at all entail knowledge for the agent. 
(15) [To this it may be] said: 
15 (16) There is a difference between the two—namely, that the whole 
proceeded from His essence because of His knowledge of the whole. Thus, 
the representation of the whole order is the cause of the emanation of the 
whole. There is no principle for [the existence of the whole] other than 
[His] knowledge of the whole. [His] knowledge of the whole is identical 
20 with His essence. Had He had no knowledge of the whole, the whole would 
not have come into existence. This is unlike [the case] of light and the sun. 
(17) [To this] we say: 
(18) In this your [philosopher] brethren disagreed with you. For they 
said, "His essence is an essence from which the existence of the whole 
25 in its order follows necessarily, naturally, and by compulsion, not inas­
much as He has knowledge of [this essence]." As long as you [Avicenna] 
agree with them in denying [God's] will, what is there that would render 
their doctrine impossible? And since knowledge of the sun of light was 
not made a condition for the necessity of light, light rather proceeding 
30 from it necessarily, let this be supposed with the First. There is nothing 
to prevent this [view]. 
(19) The second way [of answering the philosophers] is to concede 
that the proceeding of something from the agent also requires knowledge 
of what proceeds. [Now,] according to them, the act of God is one—namely, 

Page 286: [No Text Extracted]

Page 287:
129 Discussion 11 
the first effect, which is a simple intellect. [From this it follows] that He 
must know only it. The first effect would [also] know only what proceeds 
from it. For the whole did not come into existence from God all at once, 
but through mediation, generation, and necessity. [Regarding] that which 
5 proceeds from what proceeds from Him, why should it be known to Him, 
when only one thing proceeds from Him? Indeed, [if] this [knowledge 
extending beyond the first effect] is not necessary with the voluntary 
act, how much more so [is it unnecessary] with the natural? For the 
[downward] motion of the stone from the top of a mountain may be due 
10 to a voluntary [act] that sets [it] in motion that necessitates knowledge 
of the source of the motion but does not necessitate knowledge of what 
is generated by [the initial voluntary act] through the mediation [of the 
movement] by way of [the stone's] colliding and its breaking another. For 
this, also, [Avicenna] has no answer. 
15 (20) [ 'lb this it may be] said: 
(21) If we judge it that He knows only Himself, this would be the ulti­
mate in repugnancy. For that which is other [than Him] knows itself, 
knows Him, and knows another. Hence, it would be above Him in nobility. 
How can the effect be nobler than the cause? 
20 (22) [To this] we say: 
(23) This repugnancy is a necessary consequence of [the doctrine] to 
which philosophy leads in terms of denying [the divine] will and denying 
the world's temporal origination; hence, [the repugnancy] must either 
be committed in the same way that the rest of the philosophers have 
25 committed [it], or else one must forsake philosophy and confess that the 
world is temporally originated by the [divine] will. 
(24) Moreover, one would say: "With what would you disavow those 
among the philosophers who say that [the effect's having more knowledge 
than the cause] does not constitute greater honor? For knowledge is 
30 needed by [a being] other [than God] only in order to acquire perfection. 
For [such a being] in himself is deficient. Man is ennobled by the intelli-
gibles, either in order to acquire knowledge of what benefits him in 
terms of consequences in this world or the next, or to perfect his dark, 
deficient self. The same is the case with all other creatures. As for God's 

Page 288: [No Text Extracted]

Page 289:
130 Discussion 11 
essence, it has no need for an act of perfecting [itself]. On the contrary, 
if one were to suppose for Him knowledge through which He is perfected, 
then His essence qua His essence would be deficient." 
(25) This is similar to what you [Avicenna] have said regarding hear-
5 ing, seeing, and knowledge of the particulars that fall under time. For 
you have agreed with the rest of the philosophers that God is above [such 
knowledge] and that the First does not know the things that undergo 
change in the realm of the temporal that divide into "what was" and 
"what will be," because that would necessitate change in His essence 
10 [and the reception of] influence. [Accordingly,] no deficiency [is involved] 
in denying Him [such knowledge]; rather, it is perfection, deficiency 
belonging to the senses and the need thereof. If it were not for the defi­
ciency of the human, he would have no need of the senses to protect him 
against whatever subjects him to change. The same applies to knowledge 
15 of temporal particular events. You [philosophers] claim that it consti­
tutes deficiency. If, then, we know all temporal events and apprehend all 
sensible things, but the First knows nothing of the particulars and appre­
hends nothing of the sensible things, this not being a deficiency [in Him], 
then knowledge of the intellectual universals can also be affirmed as 
20 belonging to another, but not affirmed of Him, this also not constituting 
deficiency [in Him]. From this [conclusion] there is no escape. 

Page 290: [No Text Extracted]

Page 291:
[TWelfth] Discussion 
On .showing their inability to 
prove that He also knows Himself 
(1) We say: "Inasmuch as the Muslims recognized the world to be 
temporally originated through His will, they inferred knowledge from 
the will and then inferred life from both will and knowledge. From life 
they then [inferred] that every living being is aware of himself. [But 
5 God] is alive; hence, He also knows Himself." This becomes a pattern of 
reasoning that is comprehensible and exceedingly strong. But in your 
case, [philosophers,] once you deny will and temporal origination, claim­
ing that whatever proceeds from Him follows by way of necessity and 
nature, why [would you hold] it improbable that His essence is such that 
10 there would proceed from Him only the first effect, and then from the 
first effect a second effect, [and so on] to the completion of the order of 
existents, but that, despite all this, He is unaware of Himself—just as, 
with fire from which heat necessarily proceeds and with the sun from 
which light necessarily proceeds, neither one knows itself, just as it does 
15 not know another? On the contrary, that which knows itself knows what 
proceeds from it and, hence, knows another. We have shown that in 
terms of their doctrine [God] does not know another and [that we] have 
forced on those who oppose them on this the necessary consequence of 
[actually] agreeing with them by dint of the [very] position [these oppo-
20 nents] take. If, then, He does not know another, it is not unlikely that He 
does not know Himself. 
(2) If it is said, "Whoever does not know himself is dead; how could 
the First be dead?" we say: 
-131-

Page 292: [No Text Extracted]

Page 293:
132 Discussion 12 
(3) This is a necessary consequence forced on you by the logic of your 
doctrine. For there is no difference between you and the one who says, 
"Whoever does not act through will, power, and choice, and who neither 
hears nor sees, is dead; and [moreover,] he who does not know another 
5 is dead." If, then, it is possible for the First to be devoid of all these 
attributes, what need is there for Him to know Himself? If they return 
to [the argument] that everything free from matter is in itself intellect 
and, hence, apprehends itself, we have shown that this is an arbitrary 
assertion, having no demonstration to prove it. 
10 (4) [To this it may be] said: 
(5) The demonstration for this is that the existent divides into the 
living and the dead, the living being prior to the dead and nobler. But 
the First is prior and nobler and is thus living—everything alive being 
aware of itself—since it is impossible that the living should be included 
15 among His effects while He Himself is not alive. 
(6) We say: 
(7) These are arbitrary [assertions]. For we say: "Why is it impossible 
that there should proceed from that which does not know itself that which 
knows itself, either through many intermediaries or without an interme-
20 diary? If that which renders this impossible is [the consequence] that the 
effect becomes nobler than the cause, why should it be impossible for the 
eflect to be nobler than the cause? This is not [self-evident] to the natural 
intelligence. Moreover, with what [argument] would you deny [the asser­
tion] that His nobility lies in [the fact] that the existence of the whole 
25 [universe] is a consequence of His essence [and yet is] not in His knowl­
edge?" Proof for this is that some other [existent] may know things other 
than itself, [being one] who sees and hears, whereas He neither sees nor 
hears. For if one were to say, "The existent divides into the seeing and 
the blind, the knower and the ignorant," let, then, the seeing be prior and 
30 let, then, the First be a seer and a knower of things. But you [philosophers] 
deny this and say that nobility does not lie in the seeing and knowing of 
things, but, rather, in dispensing with seeing and knowing [particular 
things]; and [that it] lies in the essence, being such that from it the whole 
[universe], which includes knowers and those with sight, comes to exist. 

Page 294: [No Text Extracted]

Page 295:
133 Discussion 12 
Similarly, there would be no nobility in [His] knowledge of [His] essence, 
but in His being the Principle of those possessing knowledge, this being 
a nobility peculiar to Him. 
(8) Hence, it is by necessity that they are compelled to deny also His 
5 knowledge of Himself, since nothing gives evidence for this except will, 
and nothing proves will except the world's temporal origination. With 
the rendering false [of their doctrine that He knows Himself], every­
thing becomes false for those who approach these things in terms of 
rational reflection. They have no proof for all that they have mentioned 
10 or denied regarding the attributes of the First, [but] only suppositions 
and opinions, disdained by the lawyers [even] in [their treatment of] the 
conjectural. There is neither wonder nor astonishment if the mind is per­
plexed as regards the divine attributes. One is only astonished at their 
conceit in themselves and in their proofs and at their belief that they 
15 have come to know these things with certainty, despite the confusion and 
error [their arguments] contain. 

Page 296: [No Text Extracted]

Page 297:
[Thirteenth] Discussion 
On refuting their statement that God, may 
He be exalted above what they say, does not know 
the particulars divisible in terms of temporal 
division into what is, what was, and what will be 
(1) They agreed on this. In the case of the one among them who 
maintained that He knows only Himself, this is evident from his doctrine. 
And those who maintain that He knows others, this being [the position] 
which Avicenna chose, claim that He knows things through a universal 
5 knowledge which does not enter time and which does not change in 
terms of the past, the future, and the present. Despite this, [Avicenna) 
claims that not even the weight of an atom, either in the heavens or on 
earth, escapes His knowledge, except that He knows the particulars by a 
universal kind [of knowing]. 
10 (2) One must begin by understanding their doctrine and then 
engage in objecting [to it]. 
(3) We will explain this with an example—namely, that the sun, for 
example, becomes eclipsed after not being eclipsed, then becomes bright 
again. Three things occur to it—I mean, to the eclipse: 
15 (4) [(1)] A state in which it is nonexistent, but its existence is 
expected—that is, it will be; [(2)] a state in which it exists—that is, it 
is; [(3)] a third state in which it is nonexistent, having, however, been 
previously existent. Alongside these three states, we have three different 
-134-

Page 298: [No Text Extracted]

Page 299:
135 Discussion 13 
cognitions. For we know, first of all, that the eclipse is nonexistent but 
will be; secondly, that it is; and, thirdly, that it was but is not presently 
existing. These three cognitions are numbered and different. Their suc­
cession over the [one] receptacle necessitates a change in the knowing 
5 essence. For, if, after the clearing [of the eclipse], one were to "know" 
that the eclipse presently exists, this would be ignorance, not knowledge; 
and if, when [the eclipse actually] exists, one were to "know" that it does 
not exist, this [also] would be ignorance [and not knowledge]. For none 
of [these states] can take the place of the other. 
10 (5) [The philosophers] thus claim that God's state does not differ in 
these three states, for this leads to change. It is inconceivable [they main­
tain] lor that whose state does not differ to know these three matters, for 
knowledge follows the object known. Thus, if the object known changes, 
knowledge changes; and if knowledge changes, the knower inescapably 
15 changes. But change in God is impossible. Despite this, [Avicenna] claims 
that [God] knows the eclipse and all its attributes and accidents, but by 
a knowledge eternally attributed to Him which does not change—as, for 
example, knowing that the sun exists and the moon exists. For these 
came to exist through Him by the mediation of the angels, which, accord-
20 ing to their idiom, they termed "pure intellects." [God] knows that [these 
two orbs] undergo a circular motion and that their sphere's paths intersect 
at two points—namely, the head and the tail—and that at certain times 
they meet at the two nodes, whereby the sun becomes eclipsed—that is, 
the body of the moon intercedes between it and the eyes of the observers 
25 so that the sun is concealed from [sight]. Moreover, [He knows] that if 
[the sun] moves beyond the node by a certain period of time—a year, for 
example—it would suffer an eclipse once again, and that that eclipse 
would cover all of it, a third of it, or half of it, and that it would last an hour 
or two hours, and so on to include all the states of the eclipse and its acci-
30 dental occurrences, such that nothing escapes His knowledge. But His 
knowledge of [all] this—before the eclipse, at the time of the eclipse, and 
when it clears—is of one unchanging pattern and does not necessitate 
change in His essence. The same applies to His knowledge of all tempo­
ral events. For these occur as a result of causes, and these causes through 
35 other causes, until they terminate with the circular heavenly motion. The 
cause of [this] movement is the soul of the heavens, and the cause of the 
soul's causing motion is the desire to imitate God and the angels close to 

Page 300: [No Text Extracted]

Page 301:
136 Discussion 13 
Him.1 The whole is thus known to Him—that is, unveiled to Him—in 
one homogeneous unveiling, unaffected by time. With all this, however, 
one does not say at the time of the eclipse that He knows that the eclipse 
presently exists; and thereafter He does not know at the time that it has 
J cleared. Now, it is inconceivable that [God] knows anything that neces­
sarily requires in defining it a relation to time, because this necessitates 
a change in [Him]. This, then, [is what they hold] regarding what is 
; divisible in terms of time. 
(6) Their doctrine is similar regarding what is divisible in terms 
10 of matter and space—as, for example, individual humans and animals. 
For they say that [God] does not know the accidents of Zayd, cAmr, and 
Khalid, but only man [in the] absolute [sense] by a universal knowledge. 
He thus knows [absolute man's] accidents and properties: that his body 
must be composed of organs, some for attacking, some for walking, some 
15 for apprehending; that some [of his organs] are pairs, some single; that 
his powers must be spread throughout his parts; and so on to the inclusion 
of every attribute external and internal to man, all that belongs to his 
appendages, attributes, and necessary concomitants, such that nothing 
escapes His knowledge, knowing [all that constitutes man] universally. 
20 As for the individual Zayd, he becomes distinguished from the individual 
cAmr to the senses, not the intellect. For the basis of the distinction is the 
pointing to him in a specific direction, whereas the intellect apprehends 
[only] absolute, universal direction and universal space. As regards our 
saying "this" and "this," this is a reference to a relation obtaining between 
25 the sensible object and the perceiver by being close to him, far from him, 
or in a specific direction—[all of which] is impossible in the case of [God]. 
(7) This is a principle which they believed and through which they 
uprooted religious laws in their entirety, since it entails that if Zayd, for 
example, obeys or disobeys God, God would not know what of his states 
30 has newly come about, because He does not know Zayd in his particularity. 
For [Zayd] is an individual, and his actions come temporally into exis­
tence after nonexistence. And if He does not know the individual, He 
does not know his states and acts. Indeed, He does not know Zayd's un­
belief or [acceptance of] Islam but only knows man's unbelief or [accep-
35 tance of] Islam absolutely and universally, not as specified in [particular] 
individuals. Indeed, it follows necessarily that one would have to say that 

Page 302: [No Text Extracted]

Page 303:
137 Discussion 13 
when Muhammad, God's prayers and peace be upon him, challenged 
[the heathen] with his prophethood, [God] did not know then that 
he made the challenge, the same being the case with every individual 
prophet, that [God] only knows that among people there would be those 
5 who would make the prophetic challenge and that their description 
would be such and such. However, as regards the specific prophet indi­
vidually, He does not know him. For that is [only] known to the senses. 
[Likewise,] He does not know the [individual] states proceeding from 
[the prophet] because these are states divisible through the division of 
10 time pertaining to a specific individual. The apprehension of [these 
states] in their diversity necessitates change [in the knower], 
(8) This, then, is what we wished to mention by way of, first, reporting 
their doctrine; second, explaining it; and third, [indicating] the repug­
nancies necessarily ensuing from it. Let us now mention their confusion 
15 [in supporting this doctrine] and [then] the manner in which it is false. 
(9) Their confusion [lies in saying] that these [the temporal sequence 
of events relating to the eclipse] are three different states and that dif­
ferent things, when succeeding each other over one receptacle, must 
necessitate a change [in the knower]. Thus, if at the time of the eclipse 
20 [God] "knows" that [the one receptacle] would be [in the same state] as 
it had been prior [to the eclipse], He would be ignorant, not knowing. If, 
[on the other hand, at the time of the eclipse] He has knowledge that 
[the eclipse] exists, but prior to this [time knowledge] that it will be, then 
His knowledge would change and His state would change. Change is thus 
25 the necessary consequence, since there is no other meaning for change 
except a difference in the knower. For whoever does not know a thing 
undergoes change when he comes to know it; and whoever has had no 
knowledge that [the eclipse] exists undergoes change when [this knowl­
edge] is realized at the time of the existence [of the eclipse]. They ascer-
30 tained this by maintaining that the states are three: 
(10) [The first is] a state which is a pure relation—as [for example] 
your being to the right or the left [of something]; for this does not refer 
to an essential attribute but is a pure relation. Thus, if the thing which 
was to your right changes to your left, your relation changes but your 
35 essence does not change in any way. For this is a change of a relation to 
the essence but [does] not [come about] through a change in the essence. 
(11) [The second] of this sort [is the case] when you are able to move 
bodies in front of you and these bodies, or some of them, cease to exist, 
where neither your innate capacity nor [other] power changes. This is 

Page 304: [No Text Extracted]

Page 305:
138 Discussion 13 
because power is the power over the moving of body; first of all in the 
absolute [general sense], and secondly over a specific [body] inasmuch as 
it is body. Thus, the relating of power to the specific body would not con­
stitute an essential attribute, but [only] a pure relation. Therefore, the 
5 ceasing [of the bodies] to exist necessitates [only] the ceasing of the rela­
tion, not a change in the state of the one endowed with power. 
(12) The third [state is one which involves] change in essence— 
namely, that He would not be knowing and then knows, or would not be 
one endowed with power and then [becomes endowed with] power. This 
10 constitutes change. The change in the object known necessitates change 
in the knowledge. For the reality of the essence of knowledge includes 
the relation to the specific object of knowledge, since the reality of the 
specific knowledge consists in its attachment to the specific object of 
knowledge as it [actually] is. Its attachment to it in a different manner 
15 necessarily constitutes another knowledge. Its succession necessitates a 
change in (he state of the knower. It is impossible to say that the essence 
has one knowledge which becomes knowledge of "what is" after having 
been knowledge of "what will be" and then becomes knowledge of "what 
was" after being knowledge of "what is." For knowledge is one, similar 
20 in its states; but [here] the relation [to the object] has changed, since 
the relation in knowledge is the reality of the essence of knowledge. 
Hence, its change necessitates a change in the essence of knowledge. As 
a consequence, change [in the knower] necessarily ensues; and this is 
impossible in the case of God. 
25 (13) The objection [to this] is in two respects: 
(14) The first is to say, "With what [argument] do you deny one who 
says that God, exalted be He, has one knowledge of the existence of the 
eclipse, for example, at a specific time; and that this [same] knowledge 
before [the existence of the eclipse] is knowledge that it will be, being 
30 identical with the knowledge at the time of the eclipse and identical with 
the knowledge after the clearing [of the eclipse]; and that these differ­
ences reduce to relations that do not necessitate change in the essence of 
knowledge and, hence, do not necessitate change in the essence of the 
knower; and that [these differences] have the status of a pure relation?" 
35 For, [in moving past you, an] individual [is first] on your right, [then] 
moves on to be in front of you, and then [moves] to your left. The rela­
tions thus succeed each other for you; but the one undergoing change is 

Page 306: [No Text Extracted]

Page 307:
139 Discussion 13 
that moving individual, not yourself. This is how the state of affairs ought 
to be understood as regards God's knowledge. For we admit that He 
knows things by one knowledge in the eternal past and future, [His] 
state never changing. Their purpose is to deny change [in God], and on 
5 this there is agreement. Their statement, however, that change [in the 
knower] follows necessarily from affirming knowledge of a present exis­
tence and its termination thereafter is not admitted. How do they know 
this? For if God creates for us knowledge of the arrival of Zayd tomorrow 
at sunrise [and] perpetuates this knowledge, neither creating another 
10 knowledge nor inattention to this knowledge, we would then, at the time 
of the sunrise, know of his arriving now purely by the previous knowl-
' v edge; and, [moreover, we would know] afterwards that he had arrived 
.earlier. This one permanent knowledge would be sufficient to encompass 
these three states. 
15 (15) There remains for them to say that the relation to the specific 
object of knowledge is included in its reality, so that whenever the rela­
tion changes, the thing for which the relation is essential changes; and 
as long as difference and succession [in the object of knowledge] occur, 
change [in the knower] takes place. [To this we] say: 
20 (16) If this is true, then follow the path of [those of] your philosopher 
brethren who maintain that [God] knows only Himself and that His knowl­
edge of Himself is identical with Himself, because if He knew absolute 
[universal] man and absolute [universal! animal and absolute [universal] 
inanimate [object], these being necessarily different, the relations to them 
25 are inevitably different. Thus, the one knowledge would not be suitable to 
be knowledge of different things because the thing related is different 
and the relation is different, the relation to the object known being essen­
tial for knowledge. This necessitates multiplicity and difference—and 
not multiplicity only with respect to similar things, since among similar 
30 things there are those that substitute for others. Knowledge of animal, 
however, is not a substitute for knowledge of the inanimate, and knowl­
edge of whiteness is not a substitute for knowledge of blackness. For 
[each of] these [examples] constitutefs] two different [things]. 
(17) Moreover [we say]: "These species, genera, and universal acci-
35 dents are infinite and are different. How can the different cognitions be 
subsumed under one knowledge—this knowledge, moreover, being the 

Page 308: [No Text Extracted]

Page 309:
140 Discussion 13 
essence of the Knower—without this constituting an addition to Him?" 
By my word, how does the rational person allow himself to deem impos­
sible the unifying of knowledge of one thing whose states divide into the 
past, present, and future but not allow as impossible the unification of 
5 knowledge connected with all the different genera and species, when the 
differences and remoteness between the various remote genera and 
species are far greater than the differences that occur between the states 
of the one thing that divide in terms of time? And if [the former] did not 
necessitate multiplicity and difference, why should this necessitate mul-
10 tiplicity and difference? Once it is established by demonstration that the 
differences in times are less than the differences between genera and 
species and that the [latter] did not necessitate multiplicity and differ­
ence, [the former], then, does not necessitate difference. And if it does 
not necessitate difference, then the encompassing of all [things]2 by one 
15 knowledge, permanent in the eternal past and future, becomes possible 
without this necessitating change in the essence of the Knower. 
(18) The second objection is to say: 
(19) What is the preventive in terms of your own principle for Him to 
know these particular matters, even though [this means] He would 
20 undergo change? And why would you not hold that this kind of change 
is not impossible for him, just asjahm, among the Muctazilites,3 held, to 
the effect that His cognitions of temporal events are [themselves] tem­
poral and, just as some of the later Karramiyya believed, that He is the 
receptacle of temporal events? The multitudes of the people following 
25 true doctrine only denounced this against them inasmuch as that what­
ever undergoes change is not free of change, and what is not free of 
change and temporal happenings is temporally originated and is not 
eternal. But you hold the doctrine that the world is eternal and is not free 
from change. If, then, you rationally comprehend an eternal that changes, 
30 there is nothing to prevent you from upholding this belief [that God 
undergoes change]. 
(20) [To this, however,] it may be said: 

Page 310: [No Text Extracted]

Page 311:
141 Discussion 13 
(21) We have only deemed this impossible because the [supposed] 
knowledge, temporally originating in His essence, must either originate 
from His direction or from the direction of another. It is false that it orig­
inates from Him. For we have shown that from the Eternal a temporal 
5 event does not proceed, and that He does not become engaged in action4 
after not being engaged in action. For this necessitates change. We have 
established this in the question of the world's temporal origination. If, 
then, this [temporal knowledge] occurs in His essence from the direction 
of another, how could another be effective in Him and cause Him to 
10 change, such that His states would change by way of force and compul­
sion from the direction of another? 
(22) We say: 
(23) Each of these two alternatives is not impossible in terms of your 
own principle. Regarding your saying that it is impossible for a temporal 
15 event to proceed from the eternal, [this] is a [statement] we have refuted 
in the question [of the world's temporal creation]. And how [is this not 
the case] when, according to you, it is impossible for a temporal event 
which is a first temporal event to proceed from an eternal, where the 
condition for its impossibility is its being first? Otherwise, these events 
20 do not have temporal causes that are infinite, but terminate through the 
mediation of this circular movement to an eternal thing—namely, the 
soul and life of the sphere. Thus, the celestial soul is eternal and the 
circular motion is originated by it. Each part of the motion comes into 
being in time and passes away, and what comes after it is inevitably 
25 renewed. Temporal events then proceed from the eternal, according to 
you; but since the states of the eternal are similar, the emanation of the 
events from it is perpetually similar, just as the parts of the movement 
are similar because it proceeds from an eternal whose states are similar. 
It thus becomes clear that each party among them confesses that it is 
30 possible for a temporal event to proceed from an eternal, if it proceeds 
uniformly and perpetually. Let, then, these temporal cognitions [in the 
divine] be of this sort. 
(24) As to the second alternative—namely, the proceeding of this 
knowledge in Him from another—we say, "Why is this impossible for 
35 you?" For it entails only three things: 

Page 312: [No Text Extracted]

Page 313:
142 Discussion 13 
(25) The first is change [in God], but we have shown its necessity in 
terms of your own principle. 
(26) The second is the other's being a cause for the change of 
another, which, however, is not impossible according to you. Let, then, 
5 the temporal occurrence of something be a cause for the temporal occur­
rence of the knowledge of it. [This is] just as when you say: "The colored 
figure's presenting itself in front of the perceiving pupil is the cause of 
the imprinting of the image of the figure in the moist layer of the eye 
with the mediation of the transparent air between the pupil and the 
10 object seen." If, then, it is possible for an inanimate thing to be a cause 
for the imprinting of the form in the pupil, this being the meaning of 
seeing, why should it be impossible for the occurrence of temporal events 
to be a cause for the occurrence of the knowledge of them by the First? 
For, just as the seeing faculty is prepared for apprehension and [as] the 
15 occurrence of the colored figure, with the removal of [all] barriers, [is] a 
cause for the occurrence of the apprehension, let, then, the essence of 
the First Principle for you be prepared to receive knowledge, changing 
from potentiality to actuality with the existence of that temporal event. 
II this entails a change of the Eternal, the changing eternal, according to 
20 you, is not impossible. And if you claim that this is impossible with the 
Necessary Existent, you have no proof for the necessary existent other 
than the termination of the chain of causes and effects, as previously 
[shown]. And we have shown that terminating the regress is possible 
with an eternal that undergoes change. [To] the third thing entailed in 
25 this—namely, [that] the Eternal [is] being changed by another and that 
this is akin to subjugation [imposed on Him] and His being held in the 
power of another—it would be said: 
(27) Why is this impossible according to you—namely, that He would 
be the cause for the occurrence of temporal events through intermediaries 
30 and that then the occurrence of temporal events would become the cause 
for the occurrence of their knowledge for Him? It would be as though He is 
the cause for realizing knowledge for Himself, but through intermediaries. 
[Regarding] your statement that this would be akin to enforcement— 
[well,] let it be so. For this is appropriate to your principle, since you 

Page 314: [No Text Extracted]

Page 315:
143 Discussion 13 
claim that what proceeds from God proceeds byway of necessity and [by] 
nature and that He has no power not to act. This also is similar to a kind 
of enforcement [imposed on Him] and indicates that He is akin to one 
compelled with respect to what proceeds from Him. 
J (28) If it is said, "This is not compulsion because His perfection con­
sists in His being a source of all things," [we say:] 
(29) This [namely, His being the cause of realizing knowledge for 
Himself] is [also] not an enforcement. For His perfection consists in His 
knowledge of all things. If there would occur to us knowledge corre-
10 sponding to every temporal event, this would be a perfection for us, [and] 
neither a deficiency nor an enforcement [on us]. So let this be the case 
with respect to Him. 

Page 316: [No Text Extracted]

Page 317:
[Fourteenth] Discussion 
On their inability to set a proof [to show] 
that heaven is an animal that obeys God, 
the Exalted, through its circular motion 
(1) They had said: 
(2) Heaven is an animal, and it has a soul whose relation to the body 
of heaven is similar to the relation of our souls to our bodies. Just as our 
bodies move voluntarily toward their goals through [their being] moved 
5 by the soul, the same [is the case] with the heavens; and the purpose 
of the heavens in their essential motion is to worship the Lord of the 
worlds, in a manner we will be mentioning. 
(3) Their doctrine in this question is one of those [views] whose 
possibility is not to be denied, nor its impossibility claimed. For God is 
10 capable of creating life in every body. For neither does the largeness 
of the body prevent its being animate, nor does its being circular. For the 
special shape is not a condition for life, since the animals, despite the 
differences in their shapes, share in their reception of life. 
(4) We claim, however, that they are unable to know this through 
15 rational proof and that, if [what they maintain] is true, it would only 
be known to prophets through an inspiration from God or [through] 
revelation. The rational syllogism,1 however, does not prove it. Yes, it is 
not improbable that the likes of this may become known through a proof, 
if proof were to be found and is helpful. But we say: "What they have 
20 brought forth as a proof is suitable only for the bestowal of an opinion; as 
to [the claim] that it bestows a conclusive [argument, the answer is], 'No.'" 
-144-

Page 318: [No Text Extracted]

Page 319:
145 Discussion 14 
(5) Their confusion in this [lies in] that they said: 
(6) Heaven is in motion, this being a premise based on sensory per­
ception. Every body in motion has a mover. This is a rational premise, 
since if [a] body were to move by virtue of being [a] body, then everybody 
5 would be in motion. Either every mover comes forth out of the essence 
of the thing in motion, as with the nature [of a thing] in the downward 
motion of the stone and [with] the will, together with power, in the motion 
of the animal; or else the mover is external but moves by compulsion, as 
with propelling a stone upwards. And everything that moves due to a 
10 notion in itself [is such] that that thing is either unaware of the motion— 
and this we call a nature, as with the downward motion of the stone—or 
is aware of it, and we call it voluntary and endowed with soul. Thus, 
motion, through these exhaustive divisions that revolve between negation 
and affirmation, becomes either natural, compulsory, or voluntary; and 
15 if two of these divisions are false, the third becomes assigned [as true]. 
(7) [Now, the mover] cannot be compulsory, because the mover by 
compulsion would be another body that is either moved voluntarily or by 
compulsion. This [forms a regress that] terminates necessarily with a 
will [that moves a body]. And once one establishes [that] a body among 
20 the heavenly bodies is moved by will, the objective [of the argument] is 
achieved. What use is there for positing compulsory motions, when in the 
end there is no escape from returning to the will? Alternatively, it may be 
said that [the heavenly body] moves by compulsion, God being the mover 
without mediation. But this is impossible, because if [the heavenly body], 
25 inasmuch as it is body, were moved by [God], He being its creator, then it 
follows necessarily that every body is moved. It is inevitable, then, that the 
movement would have a specific quality that differentiates [the heavenly 
body] from other bodies. This quality would then have to be the proxi­
mate mover, either voluntarily or by nature. [But] it is impossible to say 
30 that God moves it by will. This is because His will has the same relation 
to all bodies. Why, then, would this body, and not another, become specifi­
cally disposed for its motion to be willed? Nor can this [take place] as an 
arbitrary venture. For this is impossible, as previously [shown] in the 
question of the world's origin. 

Page 320: [No Text Extracted]

Page 321:
146 Discussion 14 
(8) If, then, it is established that this [heavenly] body must have 
within it a quality which is the principle of motion, then the first alterna­
tive—namely, the supposition of a compulsory motion—becomes false. It 
remains, then, to say that [this intrinsic characteristic] is natural. But 
5 this is impossible, because nature by itself is never a cause of movement. 
This is because the meaning of motion is escape from one place and a 
seeking of another place. If the place in which the body exists is suitable, 
it would not move away from it. For this reason, a leather flask full of 
air placed on the surface of the water will not move, but if submerged 
10 [it] will move to the surface. For it would have found the suitable place 
and come to rest, the nature continuing to be there. But if [a body] is 
moved to an unsuitable place, it escapes to the suitable place, as [with 
the air-filled flask that] escapes from the midst of water to the place of 
air. It is inconceivable that the circular motion [of the heavenly body] is 
15 natural, because each position and place one supposes for [the body] to 
escape from [is something] to which it returns. And that from which one 
naturally escapes cannot be that which is naturally sought after. For this 
reason, the air flask does not go to the interior of the water, nor would 
the [flung] stone, after settling on earth, return to the air. Thus, the only 
20 remaining alternative is the third—namely, the voluntary motion. 
(9) The objection [to this] is to say: "We will hypothesize three pos­
sible [alternatives] to your doctrine for which there is no demonstration 
[showing them] to be false." 
(10) The first is to suppose the movement of heaven to be made com-
25 pulsory by another body that wills its motion, rotating it perpetually. 
This body that moves [it] is neither a sphere nor a circumference. 
Hence, it would not be a heaven. Thus, their statement that the heavenly 
motion is voluntary and that the heaven is an animal becomes false. This 
which we have mentioned is possible, and [the only argument] for reject-
30 ing it is the mere deeming of it as unlikely. 
(11) The second is to say that the motion is compulsory, its source 
being God's will. For we say: "The movement of the stone downward is also 
compulsory, originating by God's creating motion in it. The same is to be 

Page 322: [No Text Extracted]

Page 323:
147 Discussion 14 
said of the motion of all inanimate bodies." There remains their [asking 
a question] rendering the matter unlikely, [namely:] "Why did the will 
attach specifically to that [body] when the rest of the bodies share 
corporeality with it?" But we have shown that the eternal will is such that 
5 its function is to specify one thing from its similar and that [the philoso­
phers] are forced to affirm an attribute with such a function in assigning 
the direction of the circular motion and in assigning the place of the pole 
and node—hence, we will not repeat it. To put it briefly, what they deem 
unlikely regarding the specifying of a body in terms of the will's connec-
10 tion with it without [the latter's] being differentiated by an attribute is 
turned against them in [their] having [the body, in fact,] being differen­
tiated by such an attribute. For we say: "Why is it that the heavenly body 
[in undergoing circular motion] has been distinguished by this attribute 
that differentiated it from other bodies, when the rest of the bodies are 
15 also bodies?" Why did this occur in it and not in another? If this is causally 
explained in terms of [the positing of] another attribute, the question 
is then directed toward this other attribute and would thus regress 
infinitely. In the end, they are forced to judge that there is a [discerning] 
will and that there exists among the principles that which distinguishes 
20 one thing from its similar, specifying it with a quality [distinguishing it] 
from its similars. 
(12) The third is to concede that heaven is specified with a quality, 
that quality being the principle of motion, as they believe in the case of 
the stone's downward fall, but that, as with the stone, it is unaware of it. 
25 Moreover, their statement that that which is naturally sought after is not 
that from which one flees is obfuscation. For, according to them, there 
are no numerically separate places, there being only one body and the cir­
cular motion being one. For neither body has in actuality a [determinate] 
part, nor does movement have in actuality a part, but [these are] divided 
30 in the estimation. Hence, this motion is neither for the sake of seeking 
a place, nor for the sake of fleeing from a place. It is, hence, possible to 
create a body that has in itself a notion that requires circular movement, 
the movement itself being the requirement of that notion—not that the 
requirement of the notion is to seek after a place whereby there would 
35 be a motion for the purpose of moving toward it. If your statement 
that every motion is for the sake of seeking a place or escaping from it 

Page 324: [No Text Extracted]

Page 325:
148 Discussion 14 
were necessary, it would be as though you have made the seeking of 
a place the requirement of the nature and have rendered movement 
not intended in itself, but only a means to [reaching the place]. We, how­
ever, say that it is not unlikely that the motion is the very requirement 
5 [of the notion and is] not for the purpose of seeking a place. What makes 
this impossible? 
(13) It has thus become clear that, even if one thinks that what they 
have mentioned is more probable than another supposition, it does not 
follow as a conclusive certainty that another [hypothesis] would have to 
10 be denied. Hence, [their] judgment that heaven is an animal is a purely 
arbitrary [assertion] that has no support. 

Page 326: [No Text Extracted]

Page 327:
[Fifteenth] Discussion 
On refuting what they mentioned concerning 
the purpose that moves heaven 
(1) They said: "Heaven, through its motion, obeys God and seeks to 
draw nigh to Him because every motion that is voluntary is for an end; 
for it is inconceivable that action and movement should proceed from an 
animal unless it is more suitable for [the animal] to act than to refrain 
[from the act]. Otherwise, if action and refraining from action were on a 
par, action would be inconceivable. Moreover, to seek closeness to God 
does not mean to solicit [His] satisfaction and to take precaution against 
[His] wrath. For God's sanctity is above wrath and satisfaction [with His 
creatures]. If these expressions are used, [they are used] by way of 
metaphor to express the intent to punish and the intent to reward. Nor is 
it permissible that endeavoring to draw near to God consists in seeking 
spatial closeness to Him, for this is impossible. Thus, there only remains 
the seeking of closeness to Him in terms of [His] attributes. For the most 
perfect existence is His, every existence being deficient in relation to His 
existence. Deficiency has degrees and disparities. The angel is closer to 
Him in terms of attributes, not of space. This is what is meant by 'the 
angels drawn close to Him'; that is, the intellectual substances that 
neither change, perish, nor undergo transformation and that know things 
as they [really] are. And as man becomes closer to the angels in terms of 
attributes, he becomes closer to God. The ultimate that the class of men 
can reach is [to become] similar to the angels." 
(2) If it is established that this is the meaning of seeking closeness to 
God, [this] then reduces to seeking closeness to Him in terms of attributes. 
This, for the human, consists in his knowing the realities of things and 
-149-

Page 328: [No Text Extracted]

Page 329:
150 Discussion 15 
his remaining [after death] eternally in the most perfect state that is pos­
sible for him. For eternal existence in the most perfect state belongs to 
God [alone]. All the perfection that is possible for the angels that are close 
to God is [ever] present to them in existence, since nothing [of this per-
5 fection] is in potency so as to change into actuality. Hence, their perfection 
is of the highest degree, [but only] in relation to what is other than God. 
(3) The "celestial angels" is an expression denoting the souls that 
move the heavens. They have within them what is potential. Their per­
fection divides into that which is actual, such as spherical shape and 
10 configuration, which are [ever] present, and that which is in potency— 
namely, [their] appearance in [terms of] position and place. No deter­
minate position [in the circular movement] is possible [for the spherical 
form]. It does not, however, cover the rest of the positions [other than 
the one it occupies in actuality]. For encompassing all [positions at once] 
15 is impossible. And since it cannot at one time completely [encompass] 
the individual positions, it seeks to fulfill [or encompass] them [as] a 
species. Hence, it continues to seek one position after another, and one 
place after another, this possibility never ending; and, as such, these 
motions never end. Its aim is to imitate the First Principle by attaining 
20 the utmost perfection according to [what is] possible with respect to 
Him. This is the meaning of the heavenly angels' obedience to God. This 
is realized for them in two ways. One is the complete encompassing of 
every possible position [as] a species, this being what is intended by the 
first intention. The second is the order dependent on its movement 
25 by way of the difference in relations in triangularity, squareness, con­
junction, and opposition and the differences in the astral ascendants in 
relation to the earth. Consequently, the good emanates from it onto the 
sublunary sphere, and all these events come about through it. This, then, 
is the way the heavenly soul is perfected. Every rational soul is in itself 
30 desirous of perfection. 

Page 330: [No Text Extracted]

Page 331:
151 Discussion 15 
(4) The objection to this is that the premises of this discourse include 
that which one can dispute. We will not, however, prolong matters with 
this, returning [instead] to the purpose you specified at the end and 
refuting it in two ways. 
5 (5) One of them is that seeking to perfect oneself by being in every 
place that is possible for one [to be] is folly, not obedience. This [resem­
bles] nothing [so much as] a human who, having nothing to do and having 
satisfied the needs of his appetites and wants, arises and begins to move 
around in a town or a house and claims that he is drawing near to God. 
10 For [according to him] he attains perfection by realizing for himself pres­
ence in every possible place. He [further] claims that being in [different] 
places "is possible for me, but I cannot combine them numerically, so 
I will encompass them [as a] species; for in this there is a perfecting [of 
oneself] and a drawing close [to God]." As such, his reasoning in this 
15 would be adjudged folly, and he would be deemed foolish. It would be said, 
"Moving from one realm to another and from one place to another is 
not a perfection that is significant or desirable." There is no difference 
between what they have said and this. 
(6) The second is that we say: 
20 (7) What you have mentioned of the purpose is attainable by the 
[celestial] movement from the west to the east. Why, then, is the first 
movement from the east, and why are not the movements of everything 
in one direction? If there is a purpose in their variance, why would they 
not vary [when the movement is] reversed such that movements from 
25 the east become movements from the west and those from the west from 
the east? For all that they have stated regarding the occurrence of events 
through the differences of motions by way of being threefold and sixfold 
and so on are obtainable through their reverse. The same applies to what 
they have said regarding completing the encompassing of positions and 
30 places. And why [not], when motion in the opposite direction is possible 
for it? Why does it not move from one side at one time and from another 
at another time in fulfillment of what is possible for it, if there is perfec­
tion in the fulfillment of all possibilities? [All this] indicates that these 

Page 332: [No Text Extracted]

Page 333:
152 Discussion 15 
are imaginings that achieve nothing, and that the secrets of the heavenly 
kingdom are not known with the likes of these imaginings. God makes 
them known only to his prophets and saints byway of inspiration, not by 
way of inferential proof. For this reason, the philosophers to their last 
5 have been unable to show the reason for the direction of the [celestial] 
motion and for its choice. 
(8) Some of them, however, have said: 
(9) Since their perfection is realized through motion, from whatever 
direction it is, and the ordering of the terrestrial events calls for diversity 
10 in movements and the determination of directions, the motive prompting 
them toward the [very] principle of motion is the quest after proximity 
to God, and the motive for the direction of the movement is the emana­
tion of the good on the lower world. 
(10) [We answer that] this is false in two respects. One is that if it 
15 is possible to imagine this, then let it be judged that the requirement of 
the nature [of the heaven] is rest in avoidance of motion and change, 
which in true ascertainment would be imitating God. For He is sanctified 
above change, motion being change. He, however, has chosen motion 
for the purpose of emanating the good. For this is of benefit for others, 
20 while motion neither burdens nor tires Him. What is there to prevent 
such an imagining? 
(11) The second is that events are based on the variations in the 
relations generated by the differences in the directions of motions. Let, 
then, the first motion be western and the rest eastern, through which 
25 differences and hierarchies of relations come about. Why, then, has one 
direction been determined? These differences require only the principle 
of these changes. A determinate direction, however, has no priority over 
its opposite in [the accomplishment of such an] end. 

Page 334: [No Text Extracted]

Page 335:
[Sixteenth] Discussion 
On refuting their statement that the souls of the heavens 
know all the particulars that occur in this world; 
that what is meant by "thepreserved tablet"[Our'an 85:22] 
is the souls of the heavens; that the impression of the 
world's particulars in them is similar to the impressions of 
the retained [images] in the retentive faculty entrusted in the 
human brain, not that the [preserved tablet] is a solid 
wide body on which things are inscribed in the way boys 
write on a slate, since the abundance of this writing requires 
a widening of the thing written on and, if the thing 
written is infinite, the thing written on would have to 
be infinite—but an infinite body is inconceivable, and it 
is impossible to have infinite lines on a body, and it is 
impossible to make known infinite things with limited lines 
(1) They claim that the heavenly angels are the celestial souls and 
that the cherubim that are drawn close [to God] are the pure intelligences 
that are self-subsisting substances that do not occupy space and do not 
administer bodies; that these particular forms emanate from [the celestial 
intelligences] onto the celestial souls; that [pure intelligences] are nobler 
than heavenly angels because they are bestowers, whereas [the latter] are 
bestowed upon, the bestower being nobler than the bestowed upon. For 
-153-

Page 336: [No Text Extracted]

Page 337:
154 Discussion 16 
this reason the nobler has been expressed [by the term] "the pen," so 
that God has said, "He taught by the pen" [Qur°an 96:44], because it is 
like the one who etches, who bestows [knowledge] as the teacher [bestows 
it], and He likened the bestowed upon to the tablet. This is their doctrine. 
5 (2) The dispute in this question differs from the one which preceded 
it. For what they had stated earlier is not impossible, since at most [it says] 
that heaven is an animal that moves for a purpose—and this is possible. 
But this [question, in the final analysis,] ends up in affirming a creature's 
knowledge of particulars that are infinite. And this is [something] whose 
10 impossibility one may well believe. We thus ask them for proof of it. [As 
it stands,] it is in itself sheer arbitrary [assertion]. 
(3) For proof of this they say: 
(4) It has been established that the circular motion is voluntary, the 
will following the thing willed.1 To the thing willed that is a universal, 
15 only a universal will is directed. Nothing, however, proceeds from the uni­
versal will. For every existent that is actual is [something] determinate, a 
particular. The relation of the universal will to [each] one of the particu­
lars is of one [uniform] pattern. Hence, nothing particular proceeds from 
it. Rather, there must be for the designated motion a particular will. For 
20 in the heavenly sphere, for every designated particular movement from 
one point to another, there is a particular will for that motion. It thus 
necessarily has a representation2 of particular motions by a bodily faculty, 
since particulars are apprehended only by bodily faculties. For it is a 
necessity [inherent] in every will that it [undergo] a representational 
25 apprehension3 of that thing which is willed; that is, [it has] knowledge 
of it, regardless of whether [the thing willed] is particular or universal. 
And as long as the celestial sphere has a representation of the particular 
motions and knowledge of them, it must comprehend what necessarily 
follows from them by way of differing relations to the earth, in having 
30 some parts [of the heavens] rising, some waning, some being at the cen­
ter of the sky of some folk and [conversely] beneath the feet of [another] 
folk. Likewise, it knows what necessarily follows by way of the different 
relations that are renewed through motion, such as being threefold and 

Page 338: [No Text Extracted]

Page 339:
755 Discussion 16 
sixfold, [or being] in opposition, conjunction, and so on to the rest of 
the celestial events. All of the terrestrial events depend on the celestial 
events, either without an intermediary, through one intermediary, or 
through many intermediaries. 
J (5) In brief, every event has a temporal cause, until the chain of 
causes terminates with the eternal celestial motion, where each part is a 
cause for another. Hence, the causes and effects in their chain terminate 
with the particular celestial motions. Thus, that which has a representa­
tion of the movements has a representation of their consequences and 
10 the consequences of their consequences, to the end of the chain. In this 
way, what will happen is known. For [in the case of] everything that will 
happen, its occurrence is a necessary consequence of its cause, once the 
cause is realized. We do not know what will happen in the future only 
because we do not know all the causes [of the future effects]. If we were 
15 to know all the causes, we would know all the effects. For once we know, 
for example, that fire will contact cotton at a specific time, we would know 
the burning of the cotton. And once we know that an individual will eat, 
we would know that he will be satiated. And if we know that a person will 
step across such and such a place in which is a treasure covered by some 
20 light tiling such that if a pedestrian walks over it his foot would stumble 
over the treasure and would recognize it, we would then know that he 
will become rich by finding the treasure. But we do not know these 
causes. Sometimes we may know some of them, whereby we would have 
an intuition of the occurrence of the effect. If we know the more frequent 
25 and the greater number of [the causes], we would acquire a clear, [well-
founded] opinion [regarding the effects'] occurrence.4 If knowledge of all 
the causes were to occur to us, knowledge of all the effects would occur 
to us. But the celestial [events] are numerous. Moreover, they have an 
admixture with terrestrial events. It is not within human power to know 
30 them, whereas the celestial souls know them because they know the First 
Cause, the consequences [of their own occurrences], and the conse­
quences of their consequences, to the end of the chain. 
(6) For this reason they claimed that the sleeper sees in his sleep 
what will happen in the future—this [taking place] through his contact 
35 with "the preserved tablet" and viewing it. Whenever he sees something, 
that very thing may remain in his memory. Sometimes, however, the 

Page 340: [No Text Extracted]

Page 341:
156 Discussion 16 
imaginative faculty may hasten to imitate it. For by its innate nature, 
[its function is the] imitating of things through examples that have some 
correspondence to them or else the transferring of them to their oppo­
site, whereby the truly apprehended thing is erased from the memory, 
5 the imaged example [alone] remaining in the memory. Hence, there is 
a need for interpreting what the imagination symbolizes; for example, a 
man may be exemplified by trees, a wife by a shoe, a servant by some of 
the household utensils, the trustee of pious property and alms by the oil 
of seeds—for the seeds constitute a cause for the lamp, which is the 
10 cause of illumination. The science of [dream] interpretation branches 
out from this principle. They [also] claimed that the contact with these 
[celestial] souls is openly given, since [at the time of sleep] there is no 
veil, but that in our waking hours we are preoccupied with what the 
senses and the appetites bring to us. Thus, our preoccupation with these 
15 sensory matters diverts us from [this contact]. When, during sleep, some 
of the preoccupation with the senses falls off, then there comes about 
with it some disposition toward the contact.5 
(7) [In addition,] they claimed that the prophet has knowledge of 
the unknown also in this way, except that the prophetic psychological 
20 faculty can attain such strength that the external senses do not submerge 
it. No wonder, then, that he perceives while awake what others see in 
sleep. The imaginative faculty, moreover, makes for him representations 
of what he sees. Sometimes the very thing remains in his memory, 
sometimes [only] its symbol, whereby this inspiration requires [meta-
25 phorical] interpretation, just as that which resembles it in sleep requires 
[dream] interpretation. If it were not the case that all beings firmly exist 
in "the preserved tablet," the prophets would not know the unseen, 
either in wakefulness or in sleep. But the pen runs dry in recording all of 
what would be until the date of the resurrection. The meaning of this is 
30 what we have stated. 
(8) This, then, is what we wanted to convey in explaining [the 
philosophers'] doctrine. 
(9) The answer is to say: 
(10) With what [argument] would you deny someone who says that 
35 the prophet knows the hidden through God's apprising him of it by way 
of [direct] initiation? The same applies to someone who has a vision in his 

Page 342: [No Text Extracted]

Page 343:
157 Discussion 16 
sleep who only knows [the hidden] through his being apprised [of it] 
by God or one of the angels. There is no need for any of the things you 
[philosophers] have mentioned, for there is no proof in this. Nor do you 
have a proof [for your interpretation] of what the religious law conveyed 
5 regarding "the tablet" and "the pen." For the people versed in the law 
do not understand by "the tablet" and "the pen" the meaning [you have 
given to these terms] at all. Consequently, there is nothing for you to 
cling to [for your interpretation] in the religious law. [ The only thing that] 
remains [for you] lo cling to is the ways of reason. But the existence of 
10 what you have mentioned—even if one acknowledges its possibility (as 
long as this [acknowledgment] is not conditional on the denial of the 
finitude of these objects of knowledge)—is not known and its being is 
not ascertained. The only way [for this] to be known would be from the 
religious law, not through reason. 
15 (II) Regarding what you have first mentioned by way of rational 
proof, this is built on many premises, for which |reason] we will not 
prolong matters [by] refuting [all of them]. We will confine ourselves 
to disputing three premises of these. 
(12) The first premise is your statement that the heavenly move-
20 menl is voluntary. But we have [already] finished with this question and 
[with] refuting the claim you made for it. 
(115) The second is that even if, for the sake of being tolerant, one 
concedes this [view of the voluntary movement of the heavens], your 
statement that [the heavens] need a particular representation of the 
25 particular motions is [a premise that is] not conceded. Rather, according 
to you, [the spherical] body does not have a part, since it is one thing 
and is only Hindered divisible within the faculty of estimation—nor does 
[the circular] motion, for it is one in being continuous. Hence, the desire 
[of the celestial soul]6 suffices to [make the celestial body] complete, 
30 [traversing all] the places that are possible for it, as [the philosophers] 
have mentioned. Universal representation and a universal will are suffi­
cient for [the continuous circular motion of the heavens]. 
(14) Let us, then, represent the universal and the particular will by an 
example to explain [the philosophers'] intention. If a human, for exam-
35 pie, has a universal purpose to make a pilgrimage to the house of God, 
from this universal will no motion will proceed. This is because motion 
occurs as [something] particular in a determined direction, having a 
determined quantity. Indeed, there continues to be renewed for man in 
his traveling to the house [of God] one [mental] representation after 
40 another for the place he will pass and the direction he will take, each 

Page 344: [No Text Extracted]

Page 345:
158 Discussion J 6 
particular representation being followed by a particular will to move from 
the place [already] reached through [a previous] motion. This is what they 
meant by the particular will that follows the particular representation. 
(15) One concedes this because the directions in going to Mecca are 
5 many, the distance not determined. Thus, [each act of] determining one 
place after another and one direction after another requires another 
[renewed] particular will. But in the case of the heavenly movement, it 
has only one direction. For the sphere revolves around itself and in its 
space, not going beyond it, and the movement is willed. There is, more-
10 over, nothing but one movement, one body, and one direction. This is 
similar to the fall of the stone downward. For it seeks the earth in the 
shortest way, the shortest way being the straight line. The straight line is 
determined, and it has no inherent need for the renewal of a temporal 
cause other than the universal nature that seeks the center, together 
15 with the renewal of proximity and remoteness, arriving at a limit and 
proceeding from it. Similarly, in this [heavenly] motion the universal will 
is sufficient for the motion and does not need anything more. Hence, this 
is a premise7 which [the philosophers] posited arbitrarily. 
(lb) The third premise—which is arbitrary in the extreme—is their 
20 statement that, if [the celestial sphere] forms representations of the par­
ticular motions, it also forms representations of their attendants and 
necessary consequences. This is pure insanity, as when one says, "If a 
human moves and knows his movement, he must know what follows nec­
essarily from his movement in terms of being parallel and not parallel, 
25 these being his relation to the bodies that are above him, below him, and 
to his sides; that if he walks in the sun he ought to know the places on 
which his shadow falls and those where it does not fall and what occurs 
as a result of his shadow by way of coolness through the obstructing of 
the sun's rays in these places; [that he must know] what occurs by way 
30 of pressure on the parts of the earth under his foot and what happens 
in terms of separation in them; [that he must know] what happens to his 
humors internally in terms of change toward heat due to [his] motion, 
and what of his parts changes into sweat, and so on to all the happenings 
in his body, and in other than it, for which [his] movement constitutes a 
35 cause, a condition, a preparation, a disposition." This is insanity which no 
rational being can imagine, [but] only the ignorant being deceived by it. 
It is to this that [their] arbitrary assertion reduces. 

Page 346: [No Text Extracted]

Page 347:
159 Discussion 16 
(17) But we further say, "Do these discrete particulars known to the 
soul of the heavenly sphere exist at the present, or does one add to them 
that which one expects to be in the future?" If you restrict them to the 
present, then [the heavens'] knowledge of the hidden ceases, and its 
5 mediated knowledge of the future [possessed by] the prophets while 
awake and by the rest of men while asleep [would also cease]. Moreover, 
what the proof leads to no longer holds. For it is arbitrary [to maintain] 
that, when one knows a thing, one knows its consequences and atten­
dants, so that if we knew the causes of all things we would know all 
10 future events. [Now,] the causes of all events exist now. For they consist 
of the heavenly movement—which, however, requires [as its consequence] 
the efleet through either an intermediary or many intermediaries. But if 
this goes beyond to the future, it would have no ending. How, then, are 
the infinite details of the particulars in the future known, and how would 
15 there combine in the soul of One created being at one time, without suc­
cession, detailed particular cognitions whose number is infinite and 
whose units have no (•nd?K Let anyone whose intellect does not testify to 
(he impossibility of this despair of his intellect. Should they turn this 
against us as regards God's knowledge, [we would point out] that the 
20 attachment of God's knowledge to His objects of knowledge through cor­
respondence is not in the same manner as the attachment of the cogni­
tions belonging to creatures. But as long as the soul of the heavens plays 
the same role" as the human soul, it is of the same kind as the human 
soul. For it shares with it apprehending particulars through a mediator. 
25 For if it does not affiliate with it in a definitive way, it is probable that 
it is of its kind. But even if it is not probable, it is possible. And [this] 
possibility refutes their claim of conclusiveness in what [they argued] as 
being conclusive. 
(18) [ It may be said]: 
30 (19) It rightly belongs to the human soul in its [very] essence also to 
apprehend all things.10 But its preoccupation is with the consequences of 
appetite, anger, covetousness, rancor, envy, hunger, pain, and, in general, 
the things to which the body is prone and what the senses bring to it, so 
that when the soul attends to one thing, [this thing] diverts it from some 

Page 348: [No Text Extracted]

Page 349:
160 Discussion 16 
other. The celestial souls, on the other hand, are free from these attributes; 
no distraction afflicts them, and no worry, pain, or feeling preoccupies 
them. Hence, they know all things. 
(20) We say: 
5 (21) How do you know that they have nothing which preoccupies 
them? Are not their worship of the First and their longing [for Him 
things] that absorb them and distract them from apprehending discrete 
particulars? Or, what makes it impossible to suppose [the existence of] an 
impediment other than anger, appetite, and [such] sensory impediments? 
10 How does one know that the impediments are restricted to the number 
we have witnessed in ourselves? [Now,] for rationally mature humans 
there are preoccupations such as high purpose and the quest for leader­
ship which children cannot imagine and which [such adults] do not 
believe constitute preoccupation and impediment. How does one know 
15 the impossibility of [the existence of] things that play a similar role 
among the celestial souls? 
(22) This is what we have wanted to mention concerning the sciences 
to which [the philosophers] have given the name "metaphysical." 

Page 350: [No Text Extracted]

Page 351:
PART TWO 
[The Natural Sciences] 
[Introduction] 
(1) Regarding what are called "the natural sciences," these consist of 
many sciences, whose divisions we will [now] mention so that it would be 
known that the religious law does not require disputing them nor deny­
ing them, except in places we will mention. [These sciences) divide into 
5 roots and branches. Their roots consist of eight divisions. 
(2) In the first is mentioned what adheres to body inasmuch as it 
is body by way of divisibility, motion, and change, and what is concomi­
tant with motion and [what is] a consequent to it by way of time, space, 
and I lie void. This is covered by the book Physics. 
10 (3) The second makes known the states of the divisions of the ele­
ments of the world—namely, the heavens and what exists in the sub­
lunary world by way of the four elements, their natures, and the cause for 
each of them deserving a specific place. This is covered by the book 
On the Heavens and the World. 
15 (4) In the third, one [gets to] know the states of generation and 
corruption: of generation and procreation, of growth and withering, of 
transformations and the manner in which species are retained after 
the corruption of the particulars through the two heavenly movements, 
the eastern and the western. This is covered by the book On Generation 
20 and Corruption. 
-161-

Page 352: [No Text Extracted]

Page 353:
162 The Natural Sciences: Introduction 
(5) The fourth is on the states that occur to the four elements by 
way of mixtures through which meteorological effects such as clouds, 
rain, thunder, lightning, the halo, the rainbow, storms, winds, and earth­
quakes come about. 
5 (6) The fifth is on the mineral substances. 
(7) The sixth is the laws [governing] plants. 
(8) The seventh is on animals and is covered by the book The Natures 
of the Animals} 
(9) The eighth is on the animal soul and the apprehending faculties, 
10 (showing] that the human soul does not perish with the death of the 
body and that it is a spiritual substance, corruption for it being impossible. 
(10) As for their branches, they are seven. 
(11) The first is medicine. Its objective is to become acquainted 
with I he principles of the human body, its states in terms of health and 
15 illness, and their causes and symptoms, so as to remove illness and pre­
serve health. 
(12) The second is astral determinations, which consist of supposi­
tional inferences [based on] the configurations and interrelationships of 
the stars, and of their mingling of what will happen concerning the con-
20 ditions of the world—the [political] realm, births, and [what] the years 
J will bring about]. 
(13) The third is physiognomy, which is the inference of moral dispo­
sitions from appearance. 
(14) The fourth is interpretation—namely, a detection from the 
25 imaginings in dreams of what the soul had witnessed in the world of the 
unseen [and] which the imaginative faculty has rendered as image, rep­
resenting [what the soul had witnessed by] some other [thing]. 
(15) The filth is the science of talismanic things—namely, the com­
bining of celestial powers with the powers of some terrestrial bodies so as 
30 to have composed from this a power that enacts some strange acts in the 
terrestrial world. 
(16) The sixth science is magic—namely, the mixing of the powers 
of earthly substances so as to produce strange things. 

Page 354: [No Text Extracted]

Page 355:
163 The Natural Sciences: Introduction 
(17) The seventh is the science of alchemy, whose intent is to trans­
form the properties of mineral substances so as to arrive at the attain­
ment of gold and silver through [special] kinds of devices. 
(18) There is no necessity to oppose them in terms of the revealed 
5 law in any of these sciences. We only oppose them in these sciences with 
respect to four questions. 
(19) The first is their judgment that this connection between causes 
and effects that one observes in existence is a connection of necessary 
concomitance, so that it is within neither [the realm of] power nor within 
10 [that of] possibility to bring about the cause without the effect or the 
effect without the cause.2 
(20) The second is their statement that human souls are self-subsisting 
substances, not imprinted in the body, and that the meaning of death is 
the severing of its relation with the body by severing its management 
15 [thereof]. Otherwise, [the body] would be self-subsistent in the state of 
death. They claimed that this is known through rational demonstration. 
(21) The third is their statement that annihilation is impossible for 
these souls, but that once they are brought into existence they are eter­
nal and perpetual and their annihilation inconceivable. 
20 (22) The fourth is their statement that it is impossible to return 
these souls to bodies. 
(23) The contention over the first [theory] is necessary, inasmuch as 
[on its refutation! rests the affirmation of miracles that disrupt [the] 
habitual [course of nature], such as the changing of the staff into a ser-
25 pent, revival of the dead, and the splitting of the moon. Whoever renders 
the habitual courses [of nature] a necessary constant makes all these 
[miracles] impossible. [The philosophers] have thus interpreted what is 
said in the Qur'an about the revivification of the dead metaphorically, 
saying that what is meant by it is the cessation of the death of ignorance 
30 through the life of knowledge. And they interpreted the staff devouring 
the magic of the magicians as3 the refutation by the divine proof, mani­
fest at the hand of Moses, of the doubts of those who deny [the one God]. 
As regards the splitting of the moon, they often deny the existence [of 
this occurrence] and claim that there has been no soundly transmitted, 
35 indubitable reporting of it.4 
(24) It is only in three instances that the philosophers have affirmed 
miracles that disrupt the habitual courses of nature. 

Page 356: [No Text Extracted]

Page 357:
164 The Natural Sciences: Introduction 
(25) One of these pertains to the imaginative faculty. For they main­
tain that once it becomes dominant and strong and does not become 
absorbed by the senses and preoccupation [with them], it sees the pre­
served tablet, the forms of future particular events becoming imprinted 
5 in it. This happens to prophets in their waking hours, to the rest of 
people in their sleep. This, then, is the prophetic property belonging to 
the imaginative faculty.5 
(26) The second is a special property belonging to the theoretical 
rational faculty. This pertains to the power of intuition—namely, the 
10 quick transition from one object of knowledge to another. For with many 
a quick-witted person, when a thing proved is mentioned to him, he 
[immediately] awakens to the proof [that led to the conclusion]; and, 
when the proof is mentioned, he by himself [immediately] awakens to 
what is proved. In brief, once the middle term comes to his attention, he 
15 [immediately] notices the conclusion; and, if the conclusion's two terms 
present themselves to his mind, he [immediately] becomes aware of the 
middle term connecting the conclusion's two terms. In this, people are 
divided into classes. Some by themselves become [immediately] aware 
|of the middle term], some become aware with the slightest directing of 
20 attention, and some do not become aware [of it, even] with the directing 
of attention, except after much toil. If, then, the side of deficiency can 
terminate with someone who has no intuition at all so that he does not 
become disposed, even with direction, to comprehend the intelligibles, it 
becomes possible that the side of strength and increase would 
25 terminate [with one] who becomes aware of all the intelligibles—or 
most of them—in the shortest and quickest of times. This differs quan­
titatively in all things sought after—or some of them—and in such a 
manner that [the intuitive apprehension] varies in speed and [temporal] 
proximity [to what is apprehended]. Hence, it may well be the case6 
30 that the intuition of a holy and pure soul would proceed uninterruptedly 
[so as to grasp] all the intelligibles in the quickest of times. [The one 
endowed with such a soul] would thus be the prophet who [performs] a 
miracle relating to the theoretical faculty. He would thus have no need of 
instruction in [attaining] the intelligibles. It is as though he learns by 
35 himself. He is the one described as the person "whose oil almost gives 
light, even though no fire touches it; light upon light" [Qur3an 24:35]. 
(27) The third is the practical faculty of the soul, which may reach 
a point [in strength] whereby [natural things] are influenced by it and 
do its bidding. An example of this is [that], when the soul of one of us 
40 imagines something, the limbs and the powers therein serve him and are 

Page 358: [No Text Extracted]

Page 359:
165 The Natural Sciences: Introduction 
put into motion toward the imagined thing sought after so that, if he 
imagines some tasty thing, the sides of his mouth begin to water and the 
faculty producing saliva arises, flowing with the saliva from its elemental 
sources. [Again,] if he imagines copulation, the faculty [in question] is 
5 aroused and renders the organ erected. Indeed, if he walks on a branch 
stretched in space, whose ends [rest] on two walls, [the sensation of] his 
imagining himself falling would become quite intense, [with] the body 
reacting to his imagination, and he falls. Were this [branch] on the 
ground, he would walk on it without falling. This is because bodies and 
10 bodily powers were created to serve souls and do their bidding. This varies 
with the variance of the souls' purity and strength. It is not improbable 
that the power of the soul should reach a degree where the natural 
power outside his body would serve it. For the soul is not imprinted in his 
body, except that it has a kind of inclination and desire for managing it, 
15 created as part of its nature. 
(28) If, then, it is possible for the parts of his body to obey it, it is 
not impossible for parts other [than his] to obey it. His soul then looks 
toward the blowing of a wind, the falling of rain, an attack of a storm, 
or a quaking of the earth for the annihilating of a people—all this being 
20 contingent on the occurrence of coldness, heat, or motion in I he atmos­
phere—causing the cold or heat in his soul, from which these things are 
generated without the presence of a manifest natural cause. This, then, 
would be a miracle for the prophet; but it would only occur in an atmos­
phere disposed to receive [such action], and it would not extend to having 
25 wood change into an animal and to having the moon, [which is] not 
receptive of cleavage, be split. 
(29) This, then, is their doctrine regarding miracles. We do not deny 
anything they have mentioned and [agree] that this belongs to prophets. 
We only deny their confining themselves to it and their denying the 
30 possibility of the changing of the staff into a serpent, the revivification of 
the dead, and other [miracles of the kind]. For this reason it becomes 
necessary to plunge into this question to affirm miracles and [to achieve] 
something else—namely, to support what all Muslims agree on, to the 
effect that God has power over all things. Let us, then, plunge into 
35 what is intended. 

Page 360: [No Text Extracted]

Page 361:
[Seventeenth] Discussion 
[On causality and miracles] 
(1) The connection between what is habitually believed to be a cause 
and what is habitually believed to be an effect is not necessary, according 
to us. But [with] any two things, where "this" is not "that" and "that" is 
not "this"1 and where neither the affirmation of the one entails the affir­
mation of the other nor the negation of the one entails negation of the 
other,2 it is not a necessity of the existence of the one that the other 
should exist, and it is not a necessity of the nonexistence of the one that 
the other should not exist—for example, the quenching of thirst and 
drinking, satiety and eating, burning and contact with fire, light and the 
appearance of the sun, death and decapitation, healing and the drinking 
of medicine, the purging of the bowels and the using of a purgative, and so 
on to (include] all [that is] observable among connected things in medi­
cine, astronomy, arts, and crafts. Their connection is due to the prior 
decree of God, who creates them side by side,3 not to its being necessary in 
itself, incapable of separation. On the contrary, it is within [divine] power 
to create satiety without eating, to create death without decapitation, to 
continue life after decapitation, and so on to all connected things. The 
philosophers denied the possibility of [this] and claimed it to be impossible. 
(2) To examine these matters that are beyond enumeration will take 
a long time. Let us, then, take a specific example—namely, the burning of 
cotton, for instance, when in contact with fire. For we allow the possibility 
-166-

Page 362: [No Text Extracted]

Page 363:
167 Discussion 17 
of the occurrence of the contact without the burning, and we allow as 
possible the occurrence of the cotton's transformation into burnt ashes 
without contact with the fire. [The philosophers], however, deny the pos­
sibility of this. 
5 (3) The discussion of this question involves three positions.4 
(4) The first position is for the opponent to claim that the agent of 
the burning is the fire alone, it being an agent by nature [and] not by 
choice—hence, incapable of refraining from [acting according to] what 
is in its nature after contacting a substratum receptive of it. And this is 
10 one of the things we deny. On the contrary, we say: 
(5) The one who enacts the burning by creating blackness in the 
cotton, [causing] separation in its parts, and making it cinder or ashes is 
God, either through the mediation of His angels or without mediation. As 
for fire, which is inanimate, it has no action. For what proof is there that 
15 it is the agent? They have no proof other than observing the occurrence 
of the burning at the [juncture of] contact with the fire. Observation, 
however, [only) shows the occurrence [of burning] at [the time of the 
contact with the fire] but does not show the occurrence [of burning] by 
11 he fire] and [ the fact ] that there is no other cause for it. For there is no 
20 disagreement [with the philosophers] that the infusion of spirit and of 
t lie apprehending and motive powers into the animal sperm is not engen­
dered by the natures confined in heat, cold, moistness, and dryness; that 
the father does not produce his son by placing the sperm in the womb; 
and that he does not produce his life, sight, hearing, and the rest of the 
25 [powers]5 in him. It is known that these [come to] exist with [the placing 
of the sperm], but no one says that they [come to] exist by it. Rather, they 
exist from the direction of the First, either directly or through the media­
tion of the angels entrusted with temporal things. This is what the philos­
ophers who uphold the existence of the creator uphold in a conclusive 
30 manner, [our] discourse being [at this point in agreement] with them.6 
(6) It has thus become clear that [something's] existence with a thing 
does not prove that it exists by [that thing]. Indeed, we will show this by 
an example. If a person, blind from birth, who has a film on his eyes and 
who has never heard from people the difference between night and day, 
35 were to have the film cleared from his eyes in daytime, [then] open his 

Page 364: [No Text Extracted]

Page 365:
168 Discussion 17 
eyelids and see colors, [such a person] would believe that the agent 
[causing] the apprehension of the forms of the colors in his eyes is the 
opening of his sight and that, as long as his sight is sound, [his eyes] 
opened, the film removed, and the individual in front of him having color, 
5 it follows necessarily that he would see, it being incomprehensible that 
he would not see. When, however, the sun sets and the atmosphere 
becomes dark, he would then know that it is sunlight that is the cause for 
the imprinting of the colors in his sight. 
(7) Whence can the opponent safeguard himself against there being 
10 among the principles of existence grounds and causes from which these 
[observable] events emanate when a contact between them7 takes place— 
[admitting] that [these principles], however, are permanent, never ceas­
ing to exist; that they are not moving bodies that would set; that, were 
they either to cease to exist or to set, we would apprehend the dissocia-
15 lion [between I he temporal events] and would understand that there 
is a cause beyond what we observe? This [conclusion] is inescapable in 
accordance with I he reasoning based on [the philosophers' own] principle. 
(8) It is because of this that the exacting among them have agreed 
thai these accidents and events that occur when the contact between 
20 bodies takes place—and, in general, when the relationships between 
them change—emanate from the bestower of forms, who is one of the 
angels, so that they have said: "The imprinting of the form of color in 
the eye comes from the bestower of forms,8 the sun's appearance, the 
healthy pupil and the colored body being only 'readiers' and preparers 
25 for the receptacle's acceptance of these forms." They have made this 
the case with all temporal events. With this, the claim of those who pro­
claim that it is lire that enacts the burning, that it is bread that enacts 
satiety, that it is medicine that produces health, and so on, becomes false. 
(9) The second position belongs to those who admit that these tem-
30 poral events emanate from the principles of temporal events but that 
the preparation for the reception of the forms comes about through 
these present, observed causes—except that these principles are also 
[such that] things proceed from them necessarily and by nature, not by 
way of deliberation and choice, in the way [that] light proceeds from the 
35 sun, receptacles differing in their reception because of the differences 
[of J disposition. For the shiny body receives the sun's ray and reflects it, 

Page 366: [No Text Extracted]

Page 367:
169 Discussion 17 
whereby another place is illuminated by it, whereas mud does not; air 
does not prevent the penetration of light, whereas stone does; some things 
are softened by the sun, some hardened; some [are] whitened, as with 
the bleacher's garment, [and] some blackened, as with his face. [In all 
J this, they maintain that] the principle is one but [that] the effects differ 
because of the differences of the dispositions in the receptacle. Similarly, 
the principles of existence are ever inundating with what proceeds from 
them, having neither restraint from granting nor stinginess: the short­
coming is only due to the receptacles. This being the case [they argue] 
10 then as long as we suppose a fire having the quality [proper to it] and we 
suppose two similar pieces of cotton that come into contact with it in the 
same way, how would it be conceivable that one should burn and not the 
other, when there is no choice [on the part of the agent]? Based on this 
notion, they denied the falling of Abraham in the fire without the burning 
15 taking place, the fire remaining fire, and claimed that this is only possi­
ble by taking the heat out of the fire—which makes it no longer fire—or 
by changing the essence and body of Abraham into a stone or something 
over which fire has no effect. But neither is this [latter] possible, nor is 
that [former] possible. 
20 (10) The answer [to this] has two approaches. 
(11) The first is to say: "We do not concede that the principles do not 
act by choice and that God does nol act voluntarily." We have finished 
with refuting their claim concerning this in the question of the world's 
creation. If, then, it is established that the Agent creates the burning 
25 through His will when the piece of cotton comes into contact with the 
fire, it becomes rationally possible [for God] not to create [the burning] 
with the existence of the contact. 
(12) [To this] it may be said: 
(13) This leads to the commission of repugnant contradictions. For if 
30 one denies that the effects follow necessarily from their causes and relates 
them to the will of their Creator, the will having no specific designated 
course but [a course that] can vary and change in kind, then let each of us 
allow the possibility of there being in front of him ferocious beasts, raging 
fires, high mountains, or enemies ready with their weapons [to kill him], 

Page 368: [No Text Extracted]

Page 369:
170 Discussion 17 
but [also the possibility] that he does not see them because God does not 
create for him [vision of them]. And if someone leaves a book in the 
house, let him allow as possible its change on his returning home into a 
beardless slave boy—intelligent, busy with his tasks—or into an animal; 
5 or if he leaves a boy in his house, let him allow the possibility of his 
changing into a dog; or [again] if he leaves ashes, [let him allow] the pos­
sibility of its change into musk; and let him allow the possibility of stone 
changing into gold and gold into stone. If asked about any of this, he 
ought to say: "I do not know what is at the house at present. All I know 
10 is that I have left a book in the house, which is perhaps now a horse that 
has defiled the library with its urine and its dung, and that I have left 
in the house ajar of water, which may well have turned into an apple 
tree. For God is capable of everything, and it is not necessary for the 
horse to be created from the sperm nor the tree to be created from the 
15 seed—indeed, it is not necessary for either of the two to be created from 
anything. Perhaps [God] has created things that did not exist previously." 
Indeed, if (such a person] looks at a human being he has seen only now 
and is asked whether such a human is a creature that was born, let him 
hesitate and let him say that it is not impossible that some fruit in the 
20 marketplace has changed into a human—namely, this human—for God 
has power over every possible thing, and this thing is possible; hence, 
one inusl hesitate in [this mailer]. This is a mode wide open in scope for 
|numerous] illustrations, but this much is sufficient. 
(14) |()ur] answer [to this] is to say: 
25 (15) If it is established that the possible is such that there cannot be 
created for man knowledge of its nonbeing, these impossibilities would 
necessarily follow. We are not, however, rendered skeptical by the illus­
trations you have given because God created for us the knowledge that 
He did not enact these possibilities. We did not claim that these things 
30 are necessary. On the contrary, they are possibilities that may or may not 
occur. But the continuous habit of their occurrence repeatedly, one time 
after another, fixes unshakably in our minds the belief in their occurrence 
according to past habit. 

Page 370: [No Text Extracted]

Page 371:
171 Discussion 17 
(16) Indeed, it is possible for one of the prophets to know through 
the ways [the philosophers] have mentioned that a certain individual 
will not arrive from his journey tomorrow when his arrival is possible, the 
prophet [knowing, however,] the nonoccurrence of this possible thing. 
5 Nay, this is just as when one looks at a common man and knows that he 
neither knows the occult in any manner whatsoever nor apprehends the 
intelligibles without instruction; and yet, with all that, one does not deny 
that the soul and intuition [of this ordinary man] may become stronger 
so as to apprehend what the prophets apprehend, in accordance with 
10 what [the philosophers] acknowledge—although they know that such a 
possibility has not taken place. 
(17) If, then, God disrupts the habitual [course of nature] by making 
[the miracle] occur at the time in which disruptions of habitual [events] 
take place, these cognitions [of the nonoccurrence of such unusual possi-
15 bilities] slip away from [people's] hearts, and [God] does not create them. 
There is, therefore, nothing to prevent a thing being possible, within the 
capabilities of God, [but] that by His prior knowledge He knew that 
He would not do it at certain times, despite its possibility, and that He 
creates for us the knowledge that He will not create it at that time. Hence, 
20 in [all] this talk [of theirs], there is nothing but sheer vilification.9 
(18) The second approach, with which there is deliverance from these 
vilifications,10 is for us to admit" that fire is created in such away that, if 
two similar pieces of cotton come into contact with it, it would burn both, 
making no distinction between them if they are similar in all respects. 
25 With all this, however, we allow as possible that a prophet may be cast into 
the fire without being burned, either by changing the quality of the fire or 
by changing the quality of the prophet. Thus, there would come about 
either from God or from the angels a quality in the fire which restricts its 
heat to its own body so as not to transcend it (its heat would thus remain 
30 with it, and it would [still] have the form and true nature of fire, its heat 
and influence, however, not going beyond it), or else there will occur in the 
body of the prophet a quality which will not change him from being flesh 
and bone [but] which will resist the influence of the fire. For we see [that] 
a person who covers himself with talc and sits in a fiery furnace is not 
35 affected by it. The one who has not witnessed this will deny it. Hence, the 
opponent's denial that [divine] power includes the ability to establish a 

Page 372: [No Text Extracted]

Page 373:
172 Discussion 17 
certain quality either in the fire or in the human body that would prevent 
burning is like the denial of one who has never seen talc and its influence. 
Among the objects lying within God's power there are strange and won­
drous things, not all of which we have seen. Why, then, should we deny 
5 their possibility and judge them to be impossible? 
(19) Similarly, the raising of the dead and the changing of the staff 
into a snake are possible in this way—namely, that matter is receptive of 
all things. Thus, earth and the rest of the elements change into plants, 
plants—when eaten by animals—into blood, blood then changing into 
10 sperm. Sperm is then poured into (he womb and develops in stages as 
an animal; this, in accordance with habit, takes place in a lengthy period 
of time. Why, then, should the opponent deem it impossible that it lies 
within God's power to cycle matter through these stages in a time 
shorter than has been known? And if this is possible within a shorter 
15 time, there is no restriction to its being [yet] shorter. These powers 
would thus accelerate in their actions, and through [this] there would 
come about what is a miracle for the prophet. 
(20) If it is said, "Does this proceed from the prophet's soul or from 
some other principle at the suggestion of the prophet?" we say: 
20 (21) | In] what you have admitted regarding the possibility of the 
coming down of rain [and] of hurricanes and the occurrence of earth­
quakes through the power of the prophet's soul, do [such events] come 
about from him or from another principle? Our statement in [answering 
your question J is the same as your statement in [answering ours].12 It is, 
25 however, mote fitting for both you and us to relate this to God, either 
directly or through the mediation of the angels.13 The time meriting its 
appearance, however, is when the prophet's attention is wholly directed 
to it and the order of the good14 becomes specifically [dependent] on its 
appearance so that the order of the revealed law may endure. [All] this 
30 gives preponderance to15 the side of [the] existence [of the miracle], the 
thing in itself being possible [and] the principle [endowing it being] 
benevolent and generous. But it does not emanate from Him except 
when the need for its existence becomes preponderant and the order of 
the good becomes specified therein. And the order of the good becomes 
35 specified therein only if a prophet needs it to prove his prophethood in 
order to spread the good. 

Page 374: [No Text Extracted]

Page 375:
173 Discussion 17 
(22) All this is consistent with the drift of what they say and a 
necessary consequence for them as long as they bring up the topic [of the 
doctrine to which they subscribe—namely,] of the prophet's special 
endowment with a characteristic contrary to what is customary with 
5 people. For the possible amounts of such special [prophetic qualities] are 
not encompassed by the mind. Why, then, with [all] this, must one dis­
believe that whose transmission has been corroborated by innumerable 
reports, and belief in which is enjoined by the religious law? 
(23) [ To proceed] in general, since only the sperm is receptive of the 
10 animal form, I he animal powers emanating to it from the angels who, 
according [to the philosophers], are principles of being, [it follows that]16 
from I lie human sperm only a human is created and from the sperm of 
the horse only a horse, since [to take the latter case] its realization from 
the horse is the more necessitating of preponderance because of the 
15 greater appropriateness of the equine form over all other forms. In this 
way, it thus accepts only the preponderant form. For this reason, wheat 
has never sprouted from barley and apples never from the seed of pears. 
(24) Moreover, we have seen genera of animals that are [sponta­
neously] generated from earth and are never procreated—as, for exam-
20 pie, worms—and others like the mouse, the snake, and the scorpion that 
are both (spontaneously] generated and procreated, their generation 
being from the earth. Their dispositions to receive forms differ due to 
tilings unknown to us, it being beyond human power to know them, since, 
according to [the philosophers], forms do not emanate from the angels 
25 by whim or haphazardly. On the contrary, there emanates to each recep­
tacle only that to which its reception is specified by being in itself dis­
posed to receive [that thing]. [Now,] dispositions vary, their principles, 
according to them, being the configuration of the stars and the differing 
relations of the heavenly bodies in their movements. 
30 (25) From this it has become clear that the principles of dispositions 
include strange and wondrous things—so much so that the masters of the 
talismanic art have arrived, through their knowledge of the special prop­
erties of mineral substances and knowledge of the stars, [at the ability] 
to combine the heavenly powers and the special properties of minerals. 
35 They have thus taken certain forms of the terrestrial [properties] and 
sought for them a specific horoscope, bringing about through them 

Page 376: [No Text Extracted]

Page 377:
174 Discussion 17 
strange things in the world. Thus, they have at times repelled from [one] 
town the snake and the scorpion, from [another] town the bedbug, and 
so on to matters known in the talismanic art. If, then, the principles of 
dispositions are beyond enumeration, the depth of their nature beyond 
5 our ken, there being no way for us to ascertain them, how can we know 
that it is impossible for a disposition to occur in some bodies that allows 
their transformation in phase of development in the shortest time so 
that they become prepared for receiving a form they were never pre­
pared for receiving previously, and that this should not come about as a 
10 miracle? The denial of this is only due to our lack of capacity to under­
stand, [our lack of] familiarity with exalted beings, and our unawareness 
of the secrets of God, praised be He, in creation and nature. Whoever 
studies [inductively] the wonders of the sciences will not deem remote 
from the power of God, in any manner whatsoever, what has been related 
15 of the miracles of the prophets. 
(2fi) [ It may be] said: 
(27) We help you by maintaining that every possible thing is within 
the power of God, while you help us by maintaining that whatever is 
impossible is not within [divine] power. There are things whose impossi-
20 bility is known and there are things whose possibility is known, while 
there are things (lie mind confronts undecided, judging them neither to 
be impossible nor possible. Now, then, what, according to you, is the defi­
nition of the impossible? If it reduces to the combining of negation and 
affirmation in the one thing, then [go on and] say, "In the case of two 
25 things, where 'this' is not 'that' and 'that' is not 'this,' the existence of the 
one does not require the existence of the other," and say that God can 
create a will without knowledge of the object willed and can create knowl­
edge without life; that He can move a dead man's hand, seating him and 
with the hand writing volumes and engaging in crafts, the man being all 
30 the while open-eyed, staring ahead of him, but not seeing and having no 
life and no power over [what is being done]—all these ordered acts being 
created by God together with the moving of [the man's] hand, the moving 
coming from the direction of God. By allowing the possibility of this, there 
ends the distinction between the voluntary movement and the tremor. 
35 The well-designed act would no longer prove either the knowledge or the 

Page 378: [No Text Extracted]

Page 379:
175 Discussion 17 
power of the agent. [God] ought then to be able to change genera. He 
would thus change substance into accident, knowledge into power, black­
ness into whiteness, sound into smell, just as He had been able to change 
the inanimate into the animate and stone into gold, and there would follow 
5 as necessary consequences impossibilities beyond enumeration. 
(28) [We] answer: 
(29) The impossible is not within the power [of being enacted]. The 
impossible consists in affirming a thing conjointly with denying it, affirm­
ing the more specific while denying the more general, or affirming two 
10 things while negating one [of them]. What does not reduce to this is not 
impossible, and what is not impossible is within [divine] power. 
(30) As for combining blackness and whiteness, this is impossible. For 
by tlu; affirmation of the form of blackness in the receptacle we understand 
|(a)] the negation of the appearance of whiteness and [(b) the affir-
15 inalion of j the existence of blackness. Once the negation of whiteness 
becomes understood from the affirmation of blackness, then the affirma­
tion of whiteness, together with its negation, becomes impossible. 
(31) It is |further] impossible for the individual to be in two places, 
because we understand by his being in the house [for example] his not 
20 being in |a place] other than the house. Hence, it is impossible to suppose 
him in |a place] other than the house together with his being in the 
house, |his being in the house] signifying the denial of [his being] else­
where other than the house. 
(32) Similarly, we understand by the will the seeking after some-
25 thing known [to the wilier]. If, then, a quest is supposed without knowl­
edge, there would be no will. This entails the denial of what we have 
understood [by will]. 
(33) It is impossible, moreover, to create knowledge in inanimate 
matter. For we understand by the inanimate that which does not appre-
30 hend. If apprehension is created in it, then to call it inanimate in the 
sense we have understood becomes impossible. And if it does not appre­
hend, then to call what has been created "knowledge" when its receptacle 
does not apprehend anything is [also] impossible. This, then, is the way 
in which this is impossible. 
35 (34) As for the changing of genera, some of the Islamic dialectical 
theologians have said that it is within God's capacity [to enact]. We, how­
ever, say: 

Page 380: [No Text Extracted]

Page 381:
176 Discussion 17 
(35) A thing's becoming something else is unintelligible. For if black­
ness changes into a cooking pot,17 does the blackness continue to exist 
or not? If it ceases to exist, it does not change [into something else]; 
rather, the thing ceases to exist and something else comes into existence. 
5 If it [continues to] exist with the cooking pot, then it did not change, but 
something was added to it. If [on the other hand] the blackness remains 
while the cooking pot is nonexistent, then the former did not change, but 
remained as it had been. [Again,] if we say that blood has changed into 
sperm, we mean by this that that matter itself took off one form and put 
10 on another. This, then, amounts to the fact that one form has ceased to 
exist and one has come into existence, there being a subsistent matter over 
which the two forms passed in succession. And when we say that water 
through heating has changed into air, we mean that the matter receptive 
of the form of water took off this form and received another form. Matter 
15 is thus common, while the quality changes. The same holds when we say 
that the staff has changed into a serpent and earth into animal. 
(36) Between accident and substance, there is no common matter— 
nor between blackness and the cooking pot. And there is no common 
matter between the rest of the genera. It is in this respect, then, that [the 
20 transformation of different genera one into another] is impossible. 
(37) As for God's moving the hand of the dead man, setting him up 
in I he form of a living person who is seated and writes so that through 
the movement of his hand ordered writing ensues, [this] in itself is not 
impossible as long as we turn over [the enactment of] temporal events to 
25 the will of a choosing being. It is only disavowed because of the continu­
ous habit of its opposite occurring. Your statement that, with this, 
the well-designed act ceases to indicate the [existence of] the knowledge 
of t he agent is not true. For the agent now is God, who is the performer of 
the well-designed act and [the] knower of it. 
30 (38) As for your statement that there would be no difference between 
the tremor and the voluntary movement, we say: 
(39) We apprehend [this difference] in ourselves. For we have per­
ceived in ourselves a necessary distinction between the two states and 
have given expression to this difference by the term "power." We thus 
35 know that what takes place in the two possible alternatives [is two things], 

Page 382: [No Text Extracted]

Page 383:
177 Discussion 17 
one of them [occurring] in one state, the other in [another] state— 
namely, the bringing to existence of a motion with the power over it18 
in the one state, and the bringing of motion into existence without the 
power in the other state. If, however, we look at another person and see 
5 many ordered motions, there occurs to us knowledge of their being 
within his power. For these are cognitions which God creates according to 
the habitual course [of events], by which we know the existence of one of 
the two possible alternatives [but] by which the impossibility of the other 
alternative is not shown, as has been previously said. 

Page 384: [No Text Extracted]

Page 385:
[Eighteenth] Discussion 
On their inability to sustain a rational demonstration 
[proving] that the human soul is a self-subsistent 
spiritual substance that does not occupy space; that it is 
neither body nor imprinted in the body; that it is neither 
connected with nor disconnected from the body, just as 
God is neither outside nor inside the world, the same 
being the case with the angels, according to them 
(1) To plunge into this requires explaining their doctrine of the ani­
mal and human [psychological] faculties. 
(2) The animal faculties, according to (the philosophers], divide into 
two parts: motive and apprehending. The apprehending consists of two 
5 parts: external and internal. The external consists of the five senses, 
which are meanings imprinted in bodies—I mean these faculties. As for 
the internal, they are three. One of them is the imaginative faculty 
[located] in the front of the brain, behind the faculty of sight. In it, the 
forms of seen things are retained after closing the eye; indeed, there is 
10 imprinted in it what all the five senses bring in. These assemble therein, 
and for this reason it is [then] termed "the common sense." If it were 
not for [this common sense], then if someone who had seen white honey 
and [in the past] had not apprehended its sweetness except through taste 
were to see it again, he would not apprehend its sweetness unless he 
15 tasted [it] as he did the first time. But [the common sense] includes1 a 
meaning that judges that this white thing is the sweet thing. Hence, it is 
-178-

Page 386: [No Text Extracted]

Page 387:
179 Discussion 18 
inevitable that he have with him a judge where the two things—I mean 
color and sweetness—have been assembled, such that with the existence 
of the one he judges that the other exists. 
(3) The second is the estimative faculty,2 which apprehends mean-
5 ings, whereas the first faculty apprehends the forms. By "form" one 
intends that whose existence requires matter—that is, a body—and 
by "meanings" that whose existence does not require a body but which 
happens to be in a body—as, for example, enmity and harmony. Thus, the 
ewe apprehends of the wolf its color, shape, and appearance, which can 
10 only exist in a body, but she also apprehends its being disagreeable to her. 
[Again,] the kid apprehends the color and shape of the mother, then it 
apprehends her harmony and agreeableness. For this reason it flees from 
the wolf and runs after the mother. Unlike color and shape, it is not a 
necessity for disagreeableness and agreeableness to be in bodies; but it so 
15 happens that they also exist in bodies. Hence, this [imaginative] faculty 
differs from the second faculty [the estimative]. The place of this [latter] 
faculty is the hindmost concavity of the brain. 
(4) As regards the third [inner sense], this is the faculty which in 
animals is called the imaginative and in humans the cogitative. Its task is 
20 to combine the sensible forms with each other and to construct meanings 
over forms. It is in the middle concavity of the brain, between that which 
retains the forms and that which retains the meanings. For this reason 
the human can imagine a horse that flies, [or] an individual whose head 
is the head of a man and whose body is the body of a horse, or other cotn-
25 positions [of this sort], even though the likes of these have never been 
seen. It is more appropriate that this faculty should be attached to the 
motive faculty, as will be discussed shortly, [and] not with the apprehend­
ing faculties. The place of these faculties is known through the medical 
art. For when a malady afflicts any of these concavities, these [appre-
30 hending] things become defective. 
(5) They then claimed that the faculty in which the forms of the sen­
sible things experienced by the five senses are impressed retains these 
forms so that they endure after [their] reception. A thing does not retain 
[another] thing by the [same] faculty by which it receives it. For water 
35 receives but does not retain, whereas wax receives through its moistness 
and retains through its dryness, unlike water. Thus, the retentive [faculty] 

Page 388: [No Text Extracted]

Page 389:
180 Discussion 18 
through this consideration becomes other than the receptive. Hence, this 
[latter faculty] is termed "the retentive." The same applies to meanings. 
[These] are impressed on the estimative [faculty], and a faculty termed 
"memory" retains them. Thus, the internal apprehensions through this 
5 consideration, when the imaginative is added to them, become five, just 
as the external [senses] are five. 
(6) Regarding the motive faculties, they divide into a motive [faculty] 
in the sense that it motivates toward movement and into a motive 
[faculty] in the sense that it initiates the movement, enacting [it]. 
10 (7) The motive in the sense that it motivates is the appetitive, 
desirous [faculty]. This is the one which, when the form of the object of 
either desire or aversion is imprinted in the imaginative faculty which 
we have mentioned, impels the active motive faculty into motion. It has 
two branches: a branch termed "the concupiscent," a faculty that impels 
15 toward motion through which one is drawn near to the things imagined, 
whether necessary or useful, in the quest of pleasure; and a branch 
termed "irascible"—namely, a faculty that impels toward motion that 
repels the imagined thing, whether harmful or destructive, seeking to 
overcome [il|. With this faculty is fulfilled the complete resolution to 
20 [perform| the act termed "voluntary." 
(8) As regards the motive faculty, in the sense that it enacts [move­
ment |, it is a power that is imprinted in the nerves and muscles whose 
function is to contract the muscles, pulling thereby the sinews and tendons 
that are connected with the limbs to the direction wherein is the power, 
25 or else to relax and stretch them lengthwise so that the sinews and ten­
dons move in the opposite direction. These, then, are the faculties of the 
animal soul [described] by way of brevity and the abandoning of detail. 
(9) Regarding the rational human soul, called by them "the discur­
sive"—by "discursive" being meant "rational" (because discourse is exter-
30 nally the most particular of the fruits of reason and is hence attributed to 
it)—it has two faculties, a cognitive faculty and a practical faculty. Each 
of the two may be called an "intellect," but equivocally. The practical is a 

Page 390: [No Text Extracted]

Page 391:
181 Discussion 18 
faculty which is a principle that moves the body of man toward the 
ordered human arts whose order is drawn out by deliberation, [the activity] 
proper to man. As for the cognitive, this is the one termed "theoretical." 
This is a faculty whose function is to apprehend the true natures of the 
5 intelligibles stripped from matter, place, and [spatial] direction. These are 
the universal propositions3 which the speculative theologians call "states" 
at one time [and] "aspects" at another, and which the philosophers call 
"abstract universals." 
(10) Hence, the soul has two faculties in relation to two sides: the 
10 theoretical faculty in relation to the side of the angels, since through 
it [the soul] takes from the angels the true sciences—and this faculty 
ought to be constantly [open to] reception from the side above; and the 
practical faculty, which belongs to [the soul] in relation to what is below— 
namely, the direction of the body to its management and the rectification 
15 of moral dispositions. This is a faculty that ought to take control over all 
the rest of the bodily faculties, whereby the rest of the faculties would be 
disciplined by its educative action [and be] vanquished by it, so that it is 
not influenced by [the bodily faculties], but, rather, that these faculties 
[themselves] are influenced by it—[this] lest there occur in the soul by 
20 way of bodily qualities submissive dispositions called vices. Rather, [this 
practical faculty ought] to be dominant so that because of it there would 
be realized for the soul dispositions called virtues. 
(11) This, in brief, is what they have detailed regarding the animal 
and human faculties, going to great length in mentioning them, aban-
25 cloning any discussion of the vegetative powers, since talking about them 
is not to our purpose. There is nothing in what they have mentioned that 
must be denied in terms of the religious law. For these are observed mat­
ters which God has ordained to flow according to habit.4 
(12) We only want now to object to their claim of their knowing 
30 through rational demonstrations that the soul is a self-subsistent sub­
stance. We do not offer against [their claim] the objection of one who 
deems this remote from God's power or who perceives that the religious 
law has brought forth what is contrary to it. Indeed, we may well show 
in detailing the explanation of the resurrection and the afterlife that the 
35 law gives credence to it. We deny, however, their claim that reason alone 

Page 392: [No Text Extracted]

Page 393:
182 Discussion 18 
indicates this and that there is no need in it for the religious law. Let us, 
then, demand of them proofs. They have for this many demonstrations, 
as they claim. 
The first [proof]5 
(13) They say: 
5 (14) Intellectual cognitions indwell in the human soul, being restricted 
[in number], and include units that are indivisible. It is inevitable, there­
fore, that their receptacle is also indivisible. [Now,] every body is divisible. 
[ This] proves that their receptacle is something that is indivisible. One 
can formulate this according to the condition of logic in its [various] 
10 figures, but the easiest [to grasp] is to say: "If the receptacle of knowl­
edge is a divisible body, knowledge that indwells therein is also divisible; 
but the knowledge indwelling therein is not divisible; the receptacle, 
hence, is not a body." This is a hypothetical syllogism in which the contra­
dictory of the consequent is given as a second statement,6 deriving thereby 
15 as the conclusion the contradictory of the antecedent, by agreement.7 
There is, hence, no need to examine the correctness of the figure of the 
syllogism, nor also [the truth) of the two premises. For the first [consists 
of | our statement that everything that indwells in what is divisible be­
comes necessarily divisible by the [very] supposition of divisibility in its 
20 receptacle. This is a primary [truth| that cannot be doubted. The second 
is our statement that the one knowledge indwells in the human and is 
indivisible. For if it were divisible infinitely, this would be impossible; and 
if it were to have a limit, then it would necessarily include unities that 
are indivisible. In brief, we know things but cannot suppose that some 
25 [of the things in our knowledge] cease while some remain, since there is 
no "some" in these [tilings]. 
(15) The objection is from two standpoints. 
(16) The first standpoint is to say: "With what [argument] would you 
deny one who says, 'The receptacle for knowledge is single, indivisible, 
30 space-occupying substance'?" This is known from the doctrine of the spec­
ulative theologians. The only response that remains [for the philosophers] 

Page 394: [No Text Extracted]

Page 395:
183 Discussion 18 
is to deem [this doctrine] unlikely—namely [to ask] "How is it that all 
the cognitions would dwell in a single [indivisible] substance, all the sub­
stances surrounding [these cognitions] being deprived [of them while 
yet] close by?" But deeming something unlikely [does the philosophers] 
5 no good, since it [can] also be turned against their doctrine. [For one can 
ask:] "How can the soul be one thing that does not occupy space, is not 
referred to by pointing, is neither in the body nor outside it, is neither 
connected with the body nor disconnected [from it]?" We, however, will 
not favor this position [here]. For the discussion of the question of the 
10 indivisible part is lengthy, and [the philosophers] have concerning it geo­
metrical proofs that would take long to discuss. These include their 
statement: "In the case of an individual atom between two atoms, would 
one of its ends meet an identical thing that the other end meets, or some­
thing else? If an identical thing, this would be impossible. For from this 
15 it follows necessarily thai the two ends [of the atom] meet, since what­
ever meets that which meets another meets the former. If what [either 
end) meets is another [thing], then this entails affirming multiplicity and 
division."" This is a difficulty that will take long to resolve, and we have 
no need to get involved in it; so let us, hence, turn to another position. 
20 (17) The second standpoint is to say: "What you have mentioned to 
the effect that everything that indwells in a body must be divisible is 
falsified for you in terms of what the [estimative] faculty that is in the 
ewe apprehends of the wolf's enmity. For it is within the domain of one 
thing whose division is inconceivable, since enmity does not have a part 
25 where one [could] hypothesize the apprehension of some part of it and 
the ceasing to exist of another part. But, according to you, [the ewe's] 
apprehension [of the enmity] took place in a bodily faculty." For the soul 
of beasts is imprinted in bodies, not enduring after death. This they 
agree on. If, then, they are able to undertake the supposition of division 
30 in the things apprehended by the five senses, the common sense, and the 
faculty retentive of [material] forms, they are unable to suppose division 
in these meanings that do not have as a condition their being in matter. 

Page 396: [No Text Extracted]

Page 397:
184 Discussion 18 
(18) If it is said, "The ewe does not apprehend absolute enmity, 
stripped from matter, but apprehends the enmity of the determinate, 
individuated wolf, connected with its individual [self] and frame, 
whereas the rational faculty apprehends truths abstracted from materials 
5 and individuals," we say: 
(19) The ewe has apprehended the color of the wolf, its shape, and 
then its enmity. If the color is imprinted in the faculty of sight, [and] 
similarly shape, [both] being divisible by the divisibility of the receptacle 
of sight, with what, then, does [the ewe] apprehend the enmity? If it is 
10 apprehended by a body, then let it be divisible. But, by my word, what 
would be the state of that apprehension if it is divisible, and how would 
part of it be? Would this be apprehension of "some" of the enmity? If so, 
how would it have a part? Or would it be that each part is an apprehen­
sion of the whole of the enmity, whereby enmity would be known several 
15 times by having its apprehension being fixed in each part of the parts of 
the receptacle? This, then, [remains] a difficulty in their demonstration 
unresolved for them. It is in dire need of a solution. 
(20) [To this it may] be said: 
(21) This is a contradiction [you bring] into [the things that are] 
20 rationally intelligible, and intelligible things cannot be contradicted. For 
as long as you are unable to doubt the two premises—namely, that the 
one knowledge is indivisible and that whatever is indivisible does not sub­
sist in a divisible body—you cannot doubt the conclusion. 
(22) The answer is that we have written this book only to show the 
25 incoherence and inconsistency in the utterances of the philosophers. This 
has been achieved, since one of the two things has been contradicted— 
eit her what they have said about the rational soul or what they have said 
about the estimative faculty. Moreover, this contradiction shows that 
they did not notice a place of confusion in [their] syllogism. Perhaps the 
30 place of confusion lies in their statement: "Knowledge is imprinted in 
the body in the way color is imprinted in the colored thing, and color is 
divided by the division of the thing colored. Knowledge is hence divided 
by the division of the receptacle." The defect [here] is in the expression 
"being imprinted," since it is possible that the relation of knowledge to its 

Page 398: [No Text Extracted]

Page 399:
185 Discussion 18 
receptacle is unlike the relation of color to the thing colored [where, if it 
were similar,] one would consequently say that it covers it, is impressed in 
it, and is spread over its sides, and is thus divided by its division. Perhaps 
the relation of knowledge to its receptacle is of a different aspect, that 
5. aspect not allowing the division [of knowledge] with the division of the 
receptacle. Rather, its relation may well be similar to the relation of 
enmity to the body. The aspects of the relation of qualities to their recep­
tacles are not confined to one mode, nor are their details known to us in 
a manner in which we are [fully] confident. Hence, judging it without 
10 wholly comprehending the details of the relation would constitute an 
unreliable judgment. 
(23) In general, one does not deny that what they have mentioned is 
among those things that strengthen belief, making it more likely. But 
what is denied is its being known wild certainty, by a knowledge in which 
15 error is not allowed and which doubt does not frequent. This much [of 
what they say, however,] is open to doubt. 
A second proof 
(24) They say: 
(25) If knowledge of the one intellectual object of knowledge— 
namely, the object of knowledge that is abstracted from material things— 
20 is imprinted in matter in the way accidents are imprinted in bodily 
subslanc.es, then, as previously noted, its division by virtue of the division 
of the body follows necessarily. If it is not imprinted in [matter] nor 
spread over it, and the utterance "imprinting" is found repugnant, 
we will exchange it for another expression, saying: "Does knowledge 
25 have or does it not have a relation to the knower?"9 It is impossible to 
sever the relation. For if the relation is severed from it, then why should 
his being cognizant of [the object of knowledge] have preference over 
another [person's] being cognizant of it? If [knowledge] has a relation, 
then [one of] three alternatives is not excluded: either [(a)] the relation 
30 exists for each [one] of the parts of the receptacle, [or (b) it exists] for 
[only] some parts of the receptacle, or [(c)] no one part of the receptacle 
has a relation to [knowledge]. 

Page 400: [No Text Extracted]

Page 401:
186 Discussion 18 
(26) [Now,] it is false to say that there is no relation to any one unit 
of the parts [of the receptacle]. For if the units have no relation, the 
whole would have no relation. For the compound of things separated 
[from an entity] is [itself] separated [from that entity]. And it is [also] 
5 false to say that the relation is [only] to some parts [of the receptacle]. 
For that which has no relation does not in any way [share] in the meaning 
["knowledge"]. And our discussion would not pertain to it. It is, further­
more, false to say that each part which is supposed has a relation to the 
essence [of what is known]. For if the relation pertains to the essence of 
10 knowledge in its entirety, then what is known in each part is not restricted 
to a part of what is known, but to the known as [a whole]. Hence, what is 
known becomes known through instances that are infinite in actuality.10 
If [on the other hand] each part of [the receptacle] has a relation other 
than the relation which another part has to the essence of knowledge, 
15 then the essence of knowledge is divisible in meaning. But we have shown 
that knowledge of the one object of knowledge in all [its] aspects is not 
divisible in meaning. And if the relation of each [part of the receptacle] 
to some [part] ol the essence of knowledge is other than another part's 
relation to it, then the division of the essence of knowledge becomes in 
20 (his way even more apparent. [But] this [division] is impossible. 
(27) From this it becomes clear that the sensible things imprinted in 
the five senses can only be representations of particular divisible forms. 
For apprehension means the occurrence of the representation of what is 
apprehended in the soul of the one who apprehends. Each part of the 
25 representation of the perceived would then have a relation to a part of 
the bodily organ. 
(28) [Our] objection [to this] is the same as [our] previous one. For 
replacing the expression "imprinting" by the expression "relation" does 
not resolve the difficulty in the case of what is imprinted in the ewe's esti-
30 mative faculty of the wolf's enmity, according to what [the philosophers] 
have mentioned. For this is inescapably an apprehension and has a rela­
tion to [the knower], and the things you have mentioned obtain neces­
sarily for this relation. Enmity is not something measurable, having 
a measurable quantity such that its representation would be imprinted 
35 in a quantified body, its parts becoming related to its parts. The shape 
of the wolf being measurable is not sufficient [to resolve the difficulty]. 
For the ewe apprehends something other than [the wolf's] shape— 
namely, contrariety, opposition, and enmity. What is added to shape by 

Page 402: [No Text Extracted]

Page 403:
187 Discussion 18 
way of enmity has no measure; but the ewe has apprehended it by means 
of a quantified body. This form is [also] doubtful in this demonstration, 
as in the case of the first. 
(29) If one were then to say, "Why did you not refute these demon­
ic strations by [arguing] that knowledge indwells in the body in a substance 
occupying space that is indivisible—namely, the single atom?"11 we 
would say: 
(30) This is because discussing the single atom is connected with 
geometrical matters, the discussion of whose resolution takes too long. 
10 Moreover, this does not resolve the difficulty. For it would follow that 
power and will would have to exist in this atom. The human has action, 
and this is inconceivable without power and will, and will is conceivable 
only with knowledge. |Now,] the power to write exists in the hand and 
I lie fingers, whereas knowledge of [writing] is not in the hand, since il 
15 does not cease with the severing of ihe hand. Nor is the will [to write] in 
the hand. For a person may will | to write] altera hand's paralysis, but it 
is inaccessible to him, not for lack of will, but for lack of power. 
A third proof 
(31) They say: "II knowledge were to be in a part of the body, then the 
knowcr would be that pail, not the rest ol the parts of the human. But the 
20 human is said to be a knower. The state of being a knower is an attribute 
belonging to him as a whole, without relating to a specific place." 
(32) [We answer:| "This is madness. For one is called a seer, a 
hearer, and a taster, the beast also being described this way; but this 
does not indicate' that the apprehension of sensible things is not by the 
25 body." This is a kind of metaphorical speech, in the [same] way [that] it 
is said that "So-and-so is in Baghdad," even though he is in part of the 
totality of Baghdad, not in all of it; but he is made to relate to the whole. 

Page 404: [No Text Extracted]

Page 405:
188 Discussion. 18 
A fourth proof 
(33) If knowledge were to reside in a part of the heart or the brain, 
for example, ignorance being its opposite, it ought then to be possible for 
it to subsist in another part of the heart or brain. Man, then, would be 
at one and the same time both knowing and ignorant of one thing. This 
5 being impossible, it becomes evident that the receptacle of ignorance is 
the receptacle of knowledge and that this receptacle is one, wherein it 
is impossible for the two opposites to combine. For, if it were divisible, 
it would not be impossible for ignorance to reside in one part [and] 
knowledge in another. For a thing in a place is not contradicted by its 
10 opposite in another place, just as being piebald is an attribute of the one 
horse and blackness and whiteness of the one eye, but in different places. 
(34) This does not necessarily follow in the case of the senses. For 
there are no contraries to their apprehension; rather, [the sense] will 
either apprehend or not apprehend. There is nothing between them 
15 except the opposition of existence or nonexistence. No wonder, then, 
that we say, "He apprehends by some of his parts, such as the eye or 
the ear, but does not apprehend by the rest of his body." In this there 
is no contradiction. 
(35) This is not dispensed with by your statement, "The state of 
20 being a knower is contrary to the state of being ignorant, the judgment 
being general, applying to the entire body," since it is impossible for the 
judgment to pertain to other than the receptacle of the cause. For the 
knower is the receptacle in which knowledge subsists. If the term is 
applied to the whole, this is only by way of metaphor, just as one would 
25 say, "He is in Baghdad," even though he is only in part of it; and just as 
it is said, "He has sight," when we necessarily know that the judgment of 
seeing is inapplicable to the fool and the hand but pertains specifically 
to the eye. The opposition of judgments is similar to the opposition of 
[their] causes. For the judgments are confined to the receptacle of the 
30 causes [of these judgments]. 
(36) Nor is there an escape from this in someone's saying, "The recep­
tacle prepared for the reception of knowledge and ignorance in a human 
is one [and the same], and, hence, they would be in opposition in it." For, 

Page 406: [No Text Extracted]

Page 407:
189 Discussion 18 
according to you, every body that is animate is receptive of knowledge and 
ignorance; and you made no condition other than life [for this reception]. 
The remaining parts of the body, according to you, with respect to the 
reception of knowledge, are of one pattern. 
5 (37) [Our] objection is that this is turned against you with respect to 
appetite, desire, and will. For these matters are affirmed for beasts and 
man, being ideas impressed in the body. It is impossible to be repelled 
by what one desires. For then repulsion and inclination for one thing 
would combine in [the individual], desire existing in one receptacle, 
10 repulsion in another receptacle. This does not prove that these two do 
not reside in bodies. This is because these faculties, although numerous, 
distributed among many organs, have one connecting link—namely, the 
soul. This holds for both man and beast. Once this link is unified, con­
tradictory relations with respect to it become impossible. But this does 
15 not prove that the soul is not imprinted in the body as it is [imprinted] in 
the case of beasts. 
A fifth proof 
(38) They say: 
(39) If the mind apprehends the intclligibles by a bodily organ, then 
it does not apprehend itself.12 Hut the consequent is impossible. For [the 
20 mind] apprehends itself. The antecedent, hence, is impossible. 
(40) We say: 
(41) It is admitted that repeating the consequent, [but] in its contra­
dictory form, gives as its conclusion the contradictory of the antecedent. 
But this is only the case if the necessary [relation] between the conse-
25 quent and the antecedent is established. Rather, we say, "What renders the 
necessity of the consequence admissible, and what proof is there for it?" 
(42) [To this they may] say: 

Page 408: [No Text Extracted]

Page 409:
190 Discussion 18 
(43) The proof for it is that, since seeing is by means of a body, see­
ing is not connected with sight [as its object of seeing]. For seeing is not 
seen and hearing is not heard, the same being the case with the rest of 
the senses. If, then, mind apprehends only through a body, then it would 
5 not apprehend itself. For just as the mind apprehends intellectually 
what is other, it apprehends itself. For just as the one among us intellec­
tually apprehends another, he apprehends himself and apprehends 
intellectually that he apprehends another and that he has intellectually 
apprehended himself. 
10 (44) We say: 
(45) What you have stated is false in two respects. One is that, for 
us, it is possible for sight to be related to itself so that it would consist in 
(he seeing of another and of itself, in the same way that the one knowl­
edge is knowledge of another and of itself. The habitual [course of 
15 nature], however, runs contrary to this. But the disruption of the habit­
ual courses [of nature], according to us, is possible. The second—and 
this is the stronger [answer]—is for us to admit this with respect to 
|some of] the senses. But why should it be the case that, if (his is impos­
sible in some of the senses, it is impossible in others? And why is it 
20 unlikely that what governs the senses with respect to apprehension 
should dilfer, while [the senses] yet share in being bodily? [This is] just 
as sighl and touch differ, in that touch does not yield apprehension 
except through the contact of the tangible with the organ of touch, the 
same being true of smell, whereas sight differs [from these]. For it is a 
25 condition [of sight] that it should be separated from [the object of 
sight]—so |much so| that when an individual closes his eyelids he does 
not see die color ol tin; eyelid, because it is not at a distance from him. 
This difference [between sight and touch] does not necessitate a difference 
in the need for a body. Hence, it is not unlikely that there would be 
30 among the bodily senses that which is called mind, differing from the 
rest in that [these] do not apprehend themselves. 

Page 410: [No Text Extracted]

Page 411:
191 Discussion 18 
A sixth proof 
(46) They say: 
(47) If the mind were to apprehend by a bodily organ, as with sight, 
it would not have apprehended its organ, as with the rest of the senses. 
But it apprehends the brain and the heart and what is claimed to be 
5 its organ. This proves that [the object of its apprehension]13 is for [the 
mind] neither an organ nor a receptacle. Otherwise, it would not have 
apprehended it. 
(48) [Our] objection to this [argument] is similar to the objection [to 
I he argument | that preceded it. For we say, "It is not improbable for sight 
10 to perceive its receptacle, but [this] would be a reversion away from the 
habitual [course of events]"; or else we can say: "Why is it impossible for 
the senses lo differ from each other in this respect, even though, as previ­
ously mentioned, they share in being imprinted in bodies? And why do 
you say thai what subsists in a body cannot apprehend the body which is 
15 iis receptacle, when il is not necessary to make an unrestricted universal 
judgment based on a determinate particular?" One of the things whose 
falsity is agreed on and which has been stated in logic is to make a univer­
sal judgment based on a particular cause or on numerous particulars, so 
that [tlie* logicians] have illustrated it by the hypothetical example of a 
20 man who states: "Kvery animal moves its lower jaw in chewing, because 
we have examined inductively all the animals, observing them to be such," 
II lie logicians adding that he makes this error] "because of his being obliv­
ious of the crocodile; for it moves its upper jaw." [Now,] these [philoso­
phers] have examined inductively only the five senses, finding them to be 
25 of a known mode, and on this basis they have made a judgment on all. For 
the mind may well be another sense that stands in relation to the other 
senses, as the crocodile stands in relation to the rest of the animals. The 
senses, although bodily, would then be divided into those that apprehend 
their receptacle and those that do not, just as they divide into those, like 
30 sight, that apprehend their object without contact and those, like touch 
and smell, that can only apprehend through contact. Hence, if what they 
have also stated may bequeath opinion, it does not yield reliable certitude. 
(49) [The philosophers, however, may] say: 

Page 412: [No Text Extracted]

Page 413:
192 Discussion 18 
(50) We do not rely solely on the inductive examination of the senses. 
Rather, we rely on demonstration and say: 
(51) If either the heart or the brain were to constitute man's soul, 
then their apprehension would never escape him, such that he is never 
5 without the intellectual apprehension of both, just as he is never without 
apprehension of himself. For no one escapes knowing himself, but is ever 
affirming within himself [the existence] of his self.14 But unless the 
human hears what is said about the heart and the brain, or sees them 
through dissection in another human, he will neither apprehend them 
10 nor believe in their existence. If mind, then, indwells in a body, it should 
intellectually apprehend that body permanently or not apprehend it ever. 
But neither of these alternatives is true. Rather, it apprehends [the body] 
at one time, and it does not apprehend [it] at another [time]. And this is 
the verification |of this]—namely, that the apprehension indwelling 
15 in the receptacle apprehends the receptacle only because of a relation it 
has to the receptacle. [Now,| it is inconceivable that it would have any 
relation to it other than that of indwelling in it. Let it, then, apprehend 
it always; and should this relation be insufficient, it ought not to appre­
hend it ever, since it can have no other relation to it. [This is] just as, in 
20 intellectually apprehending itself, it always apprehends itself, at no time 
being oblivious of it[self |. 
(52) [To this] we say: 
(53) As long as man is aware of his self and is not inattentive to it, he 
is [merely] aware of his corpse and body. Yes, the name, form, and shape of 
25 t he heart are not specifically determined for him; nonetheless, he affirms 
himself as a body such that he affirms himself to be in his garments and 
in his house, whereas the soul which [the philosophers] mention has no 
relation to the garment or the house.15 His affirmation of the basis of body 
| in self-awareness] is constantly with him, while his unawareness of his 
30 [heart's] shape and name is akin to his unawareness of the place of 
smell—that it consists of two appendages at the front of the brain, simi­
lar to the nipples of the breast. For every human knows that he apprehends 
smell with his body; but the place of apprehension does not take shape for 
him and is not specified, even though he apprehends that it is closer to the 

Page 414: [No Text Extracted]

Page 415:
193 Discussion 18 
head than to the foot and that, within the head, it is closer to the interior 
of the nose than it is to the interior of the ear. Similarly, man is aware of 
himself and knows that his haecceity through which he subsists is closer 
to his heart and chest than it is to his foot. For he can suppose himself to 
5 continue to exist without a foot but cannot suppose himself to survive 
with the nonexistence of the heart. Thus, what [the philosophers] state 
regarding [man's] being at one time unaware of his body and at another 
time aware is not the case. 
A seventh proof 
(54) They say: 
10 (55) The faculties that apprehend through bodily organs undergo 
fatigue due to constant work through the continuing of apprehension.16 
For the continuity of molion corrupts the temperaments of bodies, 
fatiguing them. Similarly, strong things whose apprehension is clear 
weaken [these faculties! and perhaps corrupt them such that they are 
15 unable to apprehend their successively dimmer and weaker objects of 
apprehension—as, for example, [what| the loud sound does to hearing 
and great light to seeing. For they often corrupt (the faculty] or prevent 
I lie apprehension of a successive faint sound and dim objects of sight. 
Indeed, whoever tastes what is intensely sweet does not sense thereafter 
20 a lesser sweetness. 
(56) The case is the opposite with the intellectual faculty. For its ren­
dering continual its [act of | viewing the intelligibles does not tire it, and 
the apprehension of clear necessary truths renders its apprehension 
of hidden theoretical matters stronger, not weaker. If at times it under-
25 goes fatigue, this is due to its utilizing the service and help of the imagi­
native faculty, the organ of the imaginative faculty becoming weak and 
hence failing to serve the intellect. 
(57) [Our answer] is that this is of the same pattern as the previous 
one. For we say: 

Page 416: [No Text Extracted]

Page 417:
194 Discussion 18 
(58) It is not improbable that the bodily senses should differ in these 
matters. For what holds for some need not necessarily hold for others. 
Rather, it is not improbable for bodies to differ such that some are weak­
ened by one kind of movement while others are strengthened, not 
5 weakened, by [the same] kind of movement. Should [a kind of motion] 
affect [the bodily sense adversely], a cause that renews its strength would 
[arise] so that it does not experience the effect. All this is possible, since 
the judgment that holds for some things need not necessarily hold for all. 
An eighth proof 
(59) They say: 
10 (60) The powers of all parts of the body weaken at the end of growth 
as one reaches the age of forty or thereafter. Sight, hearing, and the rest 
of I he faculties thus weaken, whereas the rational faculty in most cases 
becomes stronger alter this. The inability to reflect on the intelligibles 
when bodily illness and senility due to old age take place is not a neces-
15 sary consequence [contradicting this]. For, as long as it is evident that 
[the intellect | becomes stronger as the body weakens in some instances, 
il becomes clear that it subsists by itself. Hence, its dysfunction when the 
body ceases to function does not necessitate its being subsistent in a body. 
For the repetition of the very consequent in a [hypothetical syllogism] 
20 does not yield a valid conclusion. For we say: "If the rational faculty 
subsists in a body, then the weakness of the body would in every case 
weaken it. But the consequent is impossible; hence, the antecedent is 
impossible." And if we say that the consequent exists in some instances, 
it does not follow that the antecedent exists. 
25 (61) The reason for this is that the soul has an action by itself when no 
obstacle impedes it and nothing distracts it. For the soul has two actions: 
an action in relation to the body (namely, its leading and governing it) 
and an action in relation to its principles and itself (namely, apprehending 
the intelligibles). These two are contradictory [and] irreconcilable, so that 

Page 418: [No Text Extracted]

Page 419:
195 Discussion 18 
whenever [the intellect] is occupied with one, it leaves the other, 
combining the two becoming not possible for it. The bodily things that 
preoccupy it consist of sensation, imagination, [various] appetites, anger, 
fear, depression, and pain. Thus, when you start to think about an intel-
5 ligible, all these things render17 [your thought] dysfunctional. Indeed, 
sensation alone may well prevent the apprehension and reflection of the 
mind, without [this] in any way affecting the intellectual faculty or hav-
i ing its essence afflicted by some malady. The reason in all this is the 
soul's preoccupation with one act, [distracting it] from another act. For 
10 this reason the mind's reflection is halted as a result of pain, sickness, 
and fear—for it is also a malady of the brain. 
(62) How can one deem it unlikely for the two different directions of 
the soul's action to obstruct one another when multiplicity in the one 
direction may well necessitate mutual obstruction? For fright can make 
15 one forget pain, appetite [can make one forget | anger, reflection on one 
intelligible [can make one forget| reflection on another. An indication 
that the illness that comes upon the body does not affect the receptacle 
of cognitions lies in the fact that, when [the body] returns to health, [the 
person | does not need to start acquiring the sciences anew. Rather, the 
20 stale of his soul returns as it had been, and the very same cognitions 
id in n without a [new] commencement of learning. 
((j3) [Our| objection |is iosay|: 
(()4) Tin: increase and decrease, of powers has many causes that are 
innumerable. Thus, some powers may become stronger in early life, some 
25 in middle age, and sonic at the end, (his applying to the mind as well. The 
only thing remaining |lorlhe philosophers] is a claim for probability. There 
is nothing unlikely aboul smell and sight differing in that, after forty, 
smell becomes stronger and sight weaker, even though they are equal in 
being indwellers in a body. This is just as these powers differ in degree 
30 in animals, smell being stronger in some, hearing in some, and sight in 
some, due to differences in their bodily composition that cannot be ascer­
tained. It is, hence, not improbable that the temperaments of organs 
should differ with respect to individuals and with respect to states. One of 

Page 420: [No Text Extracted]

Page 421:
196 Discussion 18 
the reasons for the weakening of sight before [the weakening of] mind 
could thus be that sight [comes] earlier [to the human]. For [the indi­
vidual] sees when first created, whereas his mind is not fully developed 
before fifteen years or more, as is seen in the differences among people 
5 in [matters like] this. Thus, it has been said that the graying in the hair 
[of the head] precedes [the graying in] hair of the beard because the 
head's hair is earlier. Hence, when one plunges into these causes and 
does not reduce these things to the habitual courses [of nature], one can­
not build on them knowledge which is reliable. [This is] because the 
10 modes of possible hypotheses regarding the increase or decrease of the 
faculties are innumerable. Nothing of this yields certainty. 
A ninth proof 
(65) They say: 
(66) How could the human be |nothing but] the body with its acci­
dents, when these [human] bodies continue to dissolve, nourishment 
15 replenishing what has been dissolved? [This is] so [much the case] that 
when we see a [newborn] boy separate from his mother, become fre­
quently ill, then become fat and grow, we are able to say that after the 
age of forty none of the parts that existed at the age of separation remain. 
Rather, his first existence consists of parts of the sperm; but none of the 
20 parts of the sperm remain, all this having dissolved and been replaced by 
another. Thus, the body will be other than that [former] body. [Yet] we 
say that this human is that very |former] human, so that there remain 
with him cognitions Irom early boyhood, all his bodily parts having 
| nonetheless] been replaced. | This] proves that the self has an existence 
25 other than the body and that the body is its tool.18 
(67) [Our] objection [to this is to say]: 

Page 422: [No Text Extracted]

Page 423:
197 Discussion 18 
(68) This is contradicted by the case of the beast and the tree when 
their state of old age is compared with their state of being young. For it 
is said that this is the very same [beast or tree] as it is said of the human, 
but this does not prove that [the former] have an existence other than 
5 the body. And what was mentioned regarding knowledge is refuted by the 
case of the retention of the forms of the imagination. For they remain 
from boyhood until old age, even if the rest of the parts of the brain have 
been replaced. Should they claim that the rest of the parts of the brain 
are not replaced, then the same would apply to the parts of the heart, 
10 both [heart and brain] being parts of the body. How, then, can it be imag­
ined that all [the parts of the body] are replaced? 
(69) On the contrary, we say: "Even if a human lived to be a hundred 
years old, for example, there would invariably remain in him parts of 
the [original] sperm. Thai ihcso should be obliterated in him is certainly 
15 not the case.1" For he is that [same] human by virtue of what remains [of 
the sperni|, just as it is said that this |lree] is that tree [at its younger 
age] and this |horse] that horse [at its younger age]. There would 
remain [something of the] sperm despite the abundance of dissolution 
and replacement." 
20 (70) An example of this is when a pound of water is poured in a 
place, another pound then poured over it so that it mixes with it, then 
a pound is taken and another pound poured in, this being repeated a 
thousand times. At the last round, we will judge that something of the 
original water remains and that any pound taken from it would still have 
25 some of I he original water.20 This is because it existed in the second round 
[of adding and pouring], in the third round to a degree close to the second, 
in the fourth to a degree close to the third, and so on to the end. This, in 
terms of [ t he philosophers'] principles, becomes the more necessary a con­
sequence, since they allow the division of bodies ad infinitum. Thus, the 
30 pouring of food into the body and the dissolution of the parts of the body 
is similar to pouring water into this vessel and scooping [water] out from it. 

Page 424: [No Text Extracted]

Page 425:
198 Discussion 18 
A tenth proof 
(71) They say: 
(72) The rational faculty apprehends the general intellectual univer­
sal which the theologians term "states." It thus apprehends the absolute 
human when the sense perceives a particular human individual,21 [the 
5 former] being other than the perceived individual. For the perceived 
[human] is in a particular place [and] has a particular color, a particular 
measure, and a particular position, whereas the intellectually appre­
hended absolute human is stripped of these things. Rather, [absolute 
man] includes everything that applies to the name "human," even if 
10 [absolute man] does not have the color of the perceived [individual], [or] 
his measure, position, and place; indeed, [absolute man] includes that 
whose existence in the future is possible—nay, even if man is anni­
hilated, the reality of man remains in the mind denuded of all these 
particulars. The same applies to all things which the senses perceive [as] 
15 individualized. I'Vom [the latter] there is achieved for the mind the reality 
of that individual as a universal stripped of materials and positions so 
that its descriptions are divided into what is essential for it, such as 
corporeality for trees and animals and animality for man, and what is 
accidental for it, such as whiteness and length to humans and trees. 
20 [The mind] judges its being essential and accidental [as applied] to the 
human genus [and the genus] of trees and to all that is [intellectually] 
apprehended, not to the observed individual. 
(73) This proves that the universal, abstracted from sensible con­
comitants, is intellectually apprehended [by man] and established in his 
25 intellect. This universal, which is intellectually apprehended, is not 
[something] to which one points and has neither position nor measure. 
I Icncc, it is either the case that its abstraction from position and matter 
is [something] in relation to that from which [the universal] is grasped— 
which is impossible, because that from which it is grasped has position, 
30 place, and measure—or in relation to that which grasps—namely, the 
rational soul. It must then be the case that the soul has no position, noth­
ing to which one points, and no measures. Otherwise, should this be 
affirmed [of the soul], it would then have to be affirmed of [the universal] 
which indwells in it. 

Page 426: [No Text Extracted]

Page 427:
199 Discussion 18 
(74) [Our] objection [is to say]: 
(75) The universal meaning which you [philosophers] have posited 
as indwelling in the mind is not conceded. Rather, only that which inheres 
in the senses inheres in the mind, except that it inheres in the senses as 
5 an aggregate which the sense is unable to separate, whereas the intellect 
is able to separate it. Then, once separated, the thing which is separated 
and singled out in the mind from its associates remains, in its being par­
ticular, similar to the thing conjoined with its associates. [The thing] 
established in the mind, however, has one and the same relation to the 
10 thing intellectually apprehended and the things similar to it. It is thus 
called "universal" in this sense—namely, that there is in the mind the 
form of (he singled-out intelligible first apprehended by the senses, the 
relation of that form to the individual instances of that genus being one 
and the same.22 For, if [a person, for example, after seeing a human] 
15 sees another human, no new appearance will appear to him in the way [a 
new appearance would occur] if he sees a horse after seeing a human; for 
then there would occur to him two different forms. 
(7(S) Something similar to this may happen in pure sensation. For 
when anyone sees water, there would occur in his imaginative faculty 
20 a form. If thereafter he sees blood, another form would then occur. If he 
were to see another (form of] water, another form would not come to be. 
Rather, the form of water [originally] imprinted in his imagination 
becomes a representative of each individual instance of water. It is thus 
I bought to be a universal in this sense. Similarly, if he sees a hand, for 
25 example, there takes place in the imagination and the mind the position 
of its parts in relation to each other—namely, the spread of the palm, 
the division of the fingers in relation to it, the ending of the fingers with 
nails—and with this there takes place [in the imagination] its smallness, 
largeness, and color. If he sees another hand similar to it in all respects, 
30 no other form is renewed for him. Indeed, the second observation is not 
effective in producing anything new in the imagination. This is the same as 
when he sees consecutive instances of water in one vessel and of the same 
amount. He may see another hand differing in color and size [from the 
first], and consequently there would occur for him another color and size. 
35 A new form of the hand, however, will not occur. For the small black hand 
shares with the big white hand the position of the parts, but differs from 

Page 428: [No Text Extracted]

Page 429:
200 Discussion 18 
it in color and size. The form of what is equivalent to the first [hand] is 
not renewed, since that form is the very same as this form. It is the form 
of what is different from it that is renewed. 
(77) This, then, is the meaning of the universal with respect to both 
5 the intellect and the senses. For when the mind apprehends from the 
animal the form of body, it does not acquire from trees a new form of 
corporeality, just as [it does not do this] in the imagination by appre­
hending the form of two [instances of water] at two [different] times, the 
same being the case with any two similar things. This does not allow for 
10 the affirmation of a universal that has no position at all. 
(78) The mind, however, may make the judgment affirming the exis­
tence of something which is not pointed at and which has no position, as 
when it makes the judgment that the creator of the world exists, but only 
from the standpoint that this is |an existent] whose subsistence in a body 
15 is inconceivable. In this division, however, that whicli is utterly set apart 
from matter is the Intelligible in Himself, independently of23 [a perceiv-
ingj intellect and an intellectual perceiver. Hut in the case of what is 
grasped from material things, its mode is as we have mentioned. 

Page 430: [No Text Extracted]

Page 431:
[Nineteenth] Discussion 
On refuting their statement that it is impossible 
for human souls to undergo annihilation 
after [having come] to exist; that they are 
everlasting, their ceasing to exist inconceivable 
(1) A proof for this is hence demanded of them. They have two proofs. 
[(1)] 
(2) One of [these proofs] is their statement that the annihilation [of 
these souls j must be either [(a)] due to the death of the body, [(b)] due 
lo the occurrence to it of a contrary, or [(c)] through the power of the 
one endowed with power. 
(3) It is false [they argue] that [the soul] should cease to exist with 
the body's death. For the body is not a receptacle for it but is a tool which 
the soul uses through the mediation of the faculties in the body. The cor­
ruption of the tool does not necessitate the corruption of the user of the 
tool, unless [the latter] inheres in it and is imprinted [therein], as with 
bestial souls and bodily faculties. Moreover, because the soul has an act 
without the participation of the tool and an act that participates with it, 
the act it has with the participation of the tool—[consisting] of imagina­
tion, sensation, appetite, and anger—no doubt comes to corruption with 
the corruption of the body, ceasing as it ceases. Its act by itself [on the 
other hand] without the participation of the body, consists of apprehend­
ing the intelligibles abstracted from material things. In its being a per-
ceiver of the intelligibles, it has no need of the body; on the contrary, its 
-201-

Page 432: [No Text Extracted]

Page 433:
202 Discussion 19 
preoccupation with the body impedes it from [apprehending] the intelli-
gibles. As long as it has an act independent of the body and an existence 
independent of the body, it does not need the body for its subsistence. 
(4) It is [likewise] false to say that it ceases to exist because [of the 
5 occurrence] of a contrary, since substances have no contraries. For this 
reason, nothing in the world is annihilated except accidents and forms that 
come to exist successively over things. For the watery form is annihilated 
by its contrary—namely, the airy form—while matter, which is the recep­
tacle, is never annihilated. [In the case of] every substance which is not 
10 in a receptacle, its annihilation through a contrary is inconceivable, since 
there is no contrary for that which is not in a receptacle. For the contraries 
are those [things] that succeed one another in one receptacle. 
(5) It is [also] false to say that [the soul] is brought into nonexis­
tence by power. For nonexistence is not a thing, such that its occurrence 
15 I lirough power is conceivable. This [it should be added] is the same thing 
11 he philosophers] have mentioned concerning the problem of the world's 
post-eternity, which we have discussed and settled.1 
(6) The objection to this [is made] in a number of ways: 
(7) The first is that [this proof] is built on [the theory] that the soul 
20 does not perish with the death of the body because it docs not indwell in 
a body. This is based on [their argument] in the first discussion,2 but we 
may not concede the point. 
(8) The second is that even if it does not, according to them, indwell 
in a body, it nonetheless has a connection with the body whereby it only 
25 comes into existence when the body comes into existence. This is what 
Avicenna and the exacting among [the philosophers] have chosen. They 
disavowed Plato's statement that the soul is pic-eternal but happens to 
undergo preoccupation with bodies, [pursuing their refutation] through 
a demonstrative, ascertained method—namely [as follows]: 
30 (9) If the souls preceding the body were one, how did they undergo 
division, when the division of that which has neither size nor quantity 
is unintelligible? If it is then claimed that [the soul] did not divide, this 
would be impossible, since it is known necessarily that the soul of Zayd is 
other than the soul of 'Amr. If it were one, then the cognitions of Zayd 
35 would be known to LAmr; for knowledge is one of the essential attributes 
of the soul, and the essential attributes are included with the essence 
in every relation. If [on the other hand] the souls are multiple, then by 

Page 434: [No Text Extracted]

Page 435:
203 Discussion 19 
what means have they been rendered multiple? They have not been 
rendered multiple through materials, places, or [different] times, nor 
through attributes, since they possess nothing that necessitates a differ­
ence in attribute, unlike the souls after the death of the body, which have 
5 been rendered multiple by a difference of attributes (for those who uphold 
their survival). [These] have acquired from bodies different characteris­
tics, whereby no two souls are similar; for their characteristics result 
from moral dispositions, and moral dispositions are never at all similar, 
just as visible characteristics are not the same. Had they been similar, 
10 we would confuse Zayd with cAmr.3 
(10) [To proceed, then, with our objection:] In terms of this demon­
stration,4 once [the soul's] creation with the creation of the sperm in the 
womb and the disposition of its bodily composition to receive the govern­
ing soul is affirmed, then the specific [attachment of the soul to the body] 
15 would only be due to a particular relation between the particular soul and 
that particular body. [The sperm] receives the soul, not simply because it 
is soul (for in one and the same womb two sperms may become disposed 
in the same receptive state [to receive] twins, whereby two souls are 
attached to them, coming into being from the First Principle, either 
20 with or without mediation, where neither would the soul of this [twin] 
manage the body of that, nor the soul of that twin manage the body of 
this). This special relation can arise only from a special affinity between a 
particular soul and a particular body. Otherwise, the body of one of the 
two twins would have no greater claim than the other for receiving this 
25 [particular] soul. For then two souls would have been created simultane­
ously and two sperms would have become disposed to jointly receive the 
governing [of two souls]. What, then, is that which specifies [the attach­
ment of one particular soul to a particular body]? If this thing that 
specifies is the [very] imprinting [of the soul in the body], then it would 
30 cease with the ceasing of the [existence] of the body. But if there is 
another mode in terms of which the relation of this specific soul to this 
specific body obtains, such that this relation is a condition for the soul's 
creation, why should it be unlikely for it to be a condition for its durabil­
ity so that, when the relation ceases, the soul ceases [to exist], never 
35 returning thereafter except through its being returned by God, praised 
and exalted be He, by way of resurrection and revivification as conveyed 
by the revealed law concerning the hereafter? 
. (11) [To this the philosophers may] say: 

Page 436: [No Text Extracted]

Page 437:
204 Discussion 19 
(12) Regarding the relation between soul and body, this only obtains 
by way of a natural inclination and an innate desire created in it for this 
body in particular, this desire for it distracting it from any other body and 
not leaving it for one moment so that it remains, by this innate desire, 
5 fettered to the specific body, turned away from [any] other. This does not 
necessitate [the soul's] corruption with the corruption of the body, which 
by its innate disposition it desires to manage. Yes, this desire may persist 
after [the soul's] separation from the body if in this life its preoccupation 
with the body and its turning away from overcoming the appetites and 
10 from seeking the intelligibles had taken full control. [The soul] thus 
becomes harmed by this desire, with the loss [after separation from the 
body] of the instrument through which the desire attains its end.5 
(13) As for assigning the soul of Zayd to the individual Zayd, when 
first coming into existence, this is inescapably due to a cause and a rela-
15 tion of adaptability between the body and the soul, so that this body, for 
example, is more suitable for this soul than [another] due to a greater 
adaptability between them, rendering preponderant the specifying [of 
this particular body for this particular soul]. It is not within human 
power to apprehend the specific relations of adaptability. Our lack of 
20 knowledge of their details, however, does not make us doubt the basic 
need for something that specifies; nor does it do damage to our state­
ment that the soul does not cease to exist with the perishing of the body. 
(14) [To this] we say: 
(15) As long as the relation of adaptability—it being the one that 
25 determines specification—is hidden from us, it is not improbable that 
this unknown relation is of a mode that renders the soul in need of 
the body for its existence so that, if [the body] is corrupted, [the soul] is 
corrupted. For with what is unknown, one cannot judge whether or not 
there is a requirement of concomitance [between this relation and the 
30 soul]. For it may well be that this relation is necessary for the existence 
of the soul so that, if [the relation] ceases to exist, [the soul] ceases to 
exist. Hence, one cannot rely on the proof they have mentioned. 
(16) [Our] third objection is that it is not improbable to say [that] 
the soul ceases to exist through the power of God, exalted be He, in the 
35 manner we established in the discussion of [the theory] of the world's 
post-eternity.6 
(17) The fourth objection is to say: "You have stated that the three 
ways concerning [the impossibility of the soul's] nonexistence [exclude 

Page 438: [No Text Extracted]

Page 439:
205 Discussion 19 
other alternatives]." This is not admitted. What proof is there that the 
thing's nonexistence is conceivable in only one of these three ways? For 
if the disjunction is not [confined to] revolving between affirming and 
denying, it is not improbable for it to be in excess of three or four [alter-
.5 natives]. It may well be that there is a fourth and a fifth way, other than 
the three [you mentioned], for nonexistence to come about. Restricting 
the ways in this to three alternatives is not known through demonstration. 
[(2)] 
(18) A second proof, on which they mainly depend, is that they say: 
(19) For any substance that does not exist in a receptacle, nonexis-
10 tence is impossible. Indeed, the simple elements are never annihilated at 
all. This proof establishes, to begin with, that the body's death does not 
necessitate the soul's nonexistence, for the reasons given [before]. After 
[maintaining] this, one will say that it is impossible for it to cease to exist 
due to [some] other cause. 
15 (20) [This is] because whatever ceases to exist by some cause, what­
ever the cause, has the potentiality of corruption before [its] corruption. 
In other words, the possibility of annihilation precedes annihilation, in 
the same way that, with any event whose existence occurs, the possibility 
of existence precedes existence. [Now,] the possibility of existence is 
20 called the potentiality for existence, and the possibility of nonexistence 
the potentiality for nonexistence. And just as the possibility of existence 
is a relational description that must subsist in something so as to be a 
possibility in relation to it, the same [holds] for the possibility of non­
existence. For this reason, it is said that every temporal event needs 
25 a preceding matter wherein lies the possibility for the existence of the 
event and its potentiality, as has [been argued] in the discussion of the 
world's pre-eternity.7 Thus, the matter which has the potentiality for 
existence is receptive of the occurring existence. The recipient, however, 
is other than the thing received. The recipient, hence, exists with the 
30 thing received when it occurs but is other than it. Similarly, the recipient 
of nonexistence ought to exist when nonexistence occurs, so that some­
thing in it would cease to exist in the same way as something had come to 
exist in it. That which ceases to exist is other than that which endures. 
And that which remains is the thing which possesses the potentiality for 
35 nonexistence—its reception and possibility—just as that which remains 
when existence occurs is other than the thing which occurs, [the former] 
having in it the potentiality for receiving the occurring event. 

Page 440: [No Text Extracted]

Page 441:
206 Discussion 19 
(21) It follows necessarily that the thing to which nonexistence has 
occurred is composed of something that has ceased to exist and a recipient 
of nonexistence which continues to exist [after] the occurrence of non­
existence, it having been the bearer of the potentiality of nonexistence 
5 prior to the occurrence of nonexistence. The bearer of the potentiality of 
[nonexistence] would be like matter, the thing that ceases to exist like 
form. But the soul is simple, being a form denuded of matter, having no 
composition. If one supposes it to have a composition of form and matter, 
we will transfer the explanation to matter, which is the origin and first 
10 fundament, since [the explanation] must end up with a first fundament; 
we will then show that nonexistence is impossible for that fundament 
which is called soul, just as we will show that nonexistence is impossible 
for the matter of bodies. For [matter] is pre-eternal and post-eternal. It 
is only that forms come to exist and cease to exist in it, there being in 
15 it t he potentiality for the occurrence of forms and the potentiality for the 
forms to cease to exist. For it is equally receptive of the two contraries. 
From this it becomes clear that every existent, unitary in essence, cannot 
be annihilated. 
(22) This can be explained in another way: the potentiality for a 
20 thing's existence is prior to the thing's existence and thus belongs to 
something other than that thing, [which,8 when it comes into existence,] 
does not itself constitute the potentiality for existence. A demonstration 
of this is that one says of a person with sound eyesight that he is a seer in 
potentiality—that is, that he has the potentiality of seeing. This means 
25 that the attribute necessary for the proper [function] of seeing to take 
place exists. If seeing is delayed, this is due to the delay of another con­
dition. Thus, for example, the potentiality to see blackness would exist in 
the eye before the seeing of blackness in actuality. If the seeing of black­
ness takes place in actuality, the potentiality for seeing blackness does 
30 not exist with the existence of that seeing. For it is impossible to say 
that, so long as seeing takes place, then, in addition to its being actually 
existent, it exists in potentiality. Rather, the potentiality of existence 
never impinges on the reality of the existent that is realized in actuality. 
If this premise is established, then we say: "If the simple thing were 
35 to be annihilated, then the possibility of nonexistence prior to existence 

Page 442: [No Text Extracted]

Page 443:
207 Discussion 19 
would have occurred to that thing, [this possibility] being what is 
intended by potentiality. Thus, the possibility of existence would also 
have been realized." For that whose annihilation is possible is not neces­
sary of existence. It is thus possible of existence. We do not mean by the 
5 potentiality of existence other than the possibility of existence. This 
would thus lead to the combination in one thing of the potentiality for its 
own existence and the actual realization of its existence. Its existence in 
actuality would be identical with the potentiality for existence. But we 
have shown that the potentiality of seeing, which is other than seeing, 
10 exists in the eye, not in the seeing, since this would lead to [the conclu­
sion] that the thing is [simultaneously] in potentiality and in action; 
these being contradictories. Rather, as long as a thing is in potentiality, it 
is not in action; and, as long as it is in action, it is not in potentiality. To 
affirm the potentiality of nonexistence for what is simple prior to non-
75 existence is to affirm the potentiality of existence in the state of existence, 
which is impossible. 
(23) [We answer:] This is the very thing which we have established 
as [their argument] in their pursuit [to prove] the impossibility of the 
temporal origination of matter and the elements and the impossibility of 
20 their annihilation, [when we discussed] the problem of the pre-eternity 
and post-eternity of the world. The source of the obfuscation is their 
positing possibility as a characteristic requiring a receptacle in which to 
subsist. We have said what is convincing about this, and we will not 
repeat ourselves. For it is one and the same problem. There is, thus, no 
25 difference between the thing discussed being a material substance or a 
psychological substance. 

Page 444: [No Text Extracted]

Page 445:
[Twentieth] Discussion 
On refuting their denial of bodily resurrection 
and the return of spirits to bodies; of the existence 
of corporeal fire; of the existence of paradise, 
the wide-eyed houris, and the rest of the things people 
have been promised; of their statement that all 
these things are parables made for the commonality 
to explain spiritual reward and punishment that 
are of a higher rank than the corporeal 
(1) This is contrary to the belief of Muslims in their entirety. Let us, 
then, first present an explanation of their belief in matters pertaining to 
the other world, then object to that portion of it that is contrary to Islam. 
(2) They said: 
5 (3) The soul endures everlastingly after death either in a pleasure so 
great that it is beyond description or in a pain so great that it [also] is 
beyond description. Moreover, [either] this pain may be eternal [or] it 
may cease with the long passage of time. The classes of people vary in 
the degrees of pain and pleasure in innumerable ways, just as they vary 
10 in worldly degrees and their pleasures in innumerable ways. Everlasting 
pleasure belongs to perfect, pure souls, [and] everlasting pain to imperfect, 
tarnished souls. Pain [in the hereafter] that ceases belongs to perfect souls 
that have been tarnished. Thus, ultimate bliss is only attained through 
perfection, purity, and cleanliness. Perfection [is attained] through knowl-
15 edge, [and] purity through action. 
-208-

Page 446: [No Text Extracted]

Page 447:
209 Discussion 20 
(4) The reason for the need of knowledge [lies in the fact] that the 
nourishment and enjoyment of the rational faculty consists in appre­
hending the intelligibles, just as the pleasure of the appetitive faculty 
consists in attaining the object of appetite, the pleasure of sight in looking 
5 at beautiful forms, and so on to the rest of the faculties. What prevents 
[the soul] from becoming cognizant of the intelligibles is the body and its 
preoccupations, its senses, and its desires. The ignorant soul in the mun­
dane world should by right undergo pain by missing the pleasure of the 
soul. But preoccupation with the body makes [such a person] forget him-
10 self, distracting him from his pain in the way that one in [the grip of] fear 
will not feel pain and one benumbed will not feel fire. Thus, if [his soul] 
remains imperfect until he is unburdened of the body's preoccupation, he 
would be in the same state as the benumbed who, when subjected to fire, 
will [at first] feel no pain; but once the numbness ceases, he would then 
15 feel the great affliction that comes all at once, as an onslaught. 
(5) The souls that apprehend the intelligibles may enjoy them in a 
faint manner, falling short of what their natures call for; this also [is] due 
to bodily preoccupations and the soul's being at home with its appetites. 
The example of this is the sick man who has a bitter [faculty of] taste. 
20 He finds the good, sweet thing distasteful and forsakes food which ought 
to be for him the most perfect reason for pleasure. He, however, will not 
enjoy it because of the illness that has afflicted him. [On the other hand, 
the state of those] souls perfected through knowledge that, with death, 
are relieved of the body's burdens and preoccupations is exemplified by 
25 the case of a person who has suffered from an impediment due to an ail­
ment that prevents him from experiencing [taste] and who, being pre­
sented with the most enjoyable and tastiest of foods, has the impediment 
[suddenly] removed, experiencing [thereby] great pleasure all at once. 
An alternative example is the case of one whose love for a person has 
30 grown intense and who, while asleep or in a faint or a state of drunken­
ness, is slept with by that person, being unaware of [such a person], 
who suddenly awakens to experience all at once, after a long wait, the 
pleasure of sexual union. These pleasures, however, are base in relation 
to spiritual and intellectual pleasures. But one cannot explain this 
35 except through examples taken from what people experience in this life. 

Page 448: [No Text Extracted]

Page 449:
210 Discussion 20 
(6) This is just [such an instance] as when we wish to explain to the 
boy or to the impotent man the pleasure of sexual intercourse [and] we 
are unable to do so except by examples—in the case of the boy, with [the 
example of] play, which is the most pleasurable thing to him; and [in 
5 the case] of the impotent man, with [the example of] the pleasure of eat­
ing good food after being very hungry, so that [each] would believe the 
principle that there is pleasure [in this], after which [each] is apprised 
that what he understood by the example does not convey the reality of 
the pleasure of sexual intercourse and that this is only apprehended 
10 through direct experience.1 
(7) The proof that the intellectual pleasures are nobler than bodily 
pleasures consists of two things: 
(8) One is that the state of angels is nobler than the state of such 
beasts as ferocious animals and pigs, since [these angels] have no sensual 
15 pleasures by way of copulation and eating. They only have the pleasure 
oi being aware of their own perfection and beauty that specifically belong 
to them through knowing the true nature of things and of being close to 
the Lord of the Worlds in [terms of] attributes, not space, and in rank 
of existence. For existents have come to be from God in an order and 
20 through intermediaries. Thus, the intermediary closer [to God] is neces­
sarily higher [in rank]. 
(9) The second is that man also prefers intellectual pleasures to the 
sensuous. For whoever is able to defeat the enemy and gloat over him 
will, in achieving [this goal], abandon the pleasures.of mating and food. 
25 Indeed, one may abandon food all day for the pleasure of winning in chess 
or backgammon, insignificant as this is, without feeling the pain of hunger. 
Similarly, one desirous of dignity and leadership would hesitate [when 
confronted with the choice] between the loss of dignity and, for example, 
attaining his goal with the woman he loves when another [person] would 
30 know this and [the affair] would become widely known. He would then pro­
tect his dignity, abandoning attainment of his [amorous] goal, belittling 
this for the sake of preserving his honor. This would thus be unquestion­
ably more pleasurable for him. [Again,] the brave warrior may some­
times attack a host of brave warriors, belittling the danger of death, in 
35 the intense desire of what he imagines to be the pleasure of praise and 
honor bestowed on him after death. 
(10) Hence, the intellectual otherworldly pleasures are better than the 
sensuous mundane pleasures. If it were not so, then God's apostle, God's 
prayers and peace be on him, would not have said [in conveying God's 
40 message]: "I have prepared for my righteous servants that which no eye 

Page 450: [No Text Extracted]

Page 451:
211 Discussion 20 
has seen and no ear has heard and which has never occurred to the heart 
of mankind." And God, exalted be He, has said: "No soul knows the eye's 
consolation secretly kept for them" [Qur°an 32:17]. 
(11) This, then, is the manner in which knowledge is needed. The 
5 beneficial parts of it are those purely intellectual sciences—namely, 
knowledge of God, His attributes, His angels, His books, and the way in 
which things come to exist through Him. Other than this, whatever is a 
means to [such knowledge] is beneficial. If, however, they are not a means 
to it—as, for example, grammar, philology, poetry, and the various kinds 
10 of sciences—these would be arts and crafts like the rest of the arts. 
(12) As regards the need for works and worship, [this] is for the pur­
pose of the soul's purification. For the soul in this body is prevented from 
apprehending the true nature of things, not because it is imprinted in the 
body, but because of its preoccupation [with it], its desire toward its appe-
15 tites, and its yearning toward [the body's] requirements. This appetite 
and desire constitutes a disposition of the soul which becomes embedded 
therein, taking hold of it through the constant endeavor to pursue 
appetites and persistence in befriending pleasurable sensible things. If, 
then, it takes hold of the soul and the body dies, these attributes [remain] 
20 embedded in the soul and would be harmful in two ways. One of them is 
that they prevent it from the pleasures peculiar to it—namely, contact 
with the angels and cognizance of the beautiful divine things when the 
preoccupying body that would, as before death, distract [the soul] from 
the pain [of not being in contact with the angelic realm] is no longer 
25 with it. The second is that the care and inclination for the world [and] its 
meaning and pleasures remains with [the person] when the organ has 
been taken away from him. For the body is the instrument for the attain­
ment of these pleasures. His state would then be the state of one who has 
fallen in love with a woman, become accustomed to leadership, found 
30 solace in children, attained wealth, and rejoiced in dignity; but then his 
beloved [woman] is killed, he is deposed from his leadership, his children 
and women are taken captive, his riches are taken by his enemies, and his 
dignity is completely destroyed. He would then suffer manifest pain. In 

Page 452: [No Text Extracted]

Page 453:
212 Discussion 20 
this life, however, he would not lose all hope for the return of such things. 
For [the affairs of this] world come and go. But [what would be his state] 
when, through the loss of the body by reason of death, all hope is lost? 
(13) Nothing will deliver one from wallowing in these dispositions 
5 except restraining the soul from passion, forsaking the world, and apply­
ing oneself with all seriousness to knowledge and piety, so that the soul's 
connection with worldly things is severed while [still] in this world and 
one's relations with otherworldly things are made firm. Thus, when [the 
person] dies he would be as one escaping from prison, arriving at all that 
10 he seeks, this being his paradise. 
(14) [Now,] it is not possible to completely remove and obliterate all 
these attributes from the soul. For bodily necessities draw it to them­
selves; but it is possible to weaken this connection. For this reason the 
Exalted has said: "None of you but will arrive at it, this being for your 
15 Lord a decreed, determined thing" [Qur3an 19:17]. When, however, the 
relation is weakened, the hurt of separation will not be severe; and the 
pleasure after death with knowing divine things becomes [so] great as to 
remove in a short time the effect of having left the mundane world. An 
example of this is a person who leaves his country for a great position 
20 and elevated kingship. His soul may feel sad at the time of separation 
from his family and homeland, and he will suffer some agony. But this is 
[soon] obliterated by what he encounters by way of pleasure and rejoicing 
in kingship and leadership. 
(15) [Since] negating these [bodily] qualities is impossible, the 
25 revealed law has prescribed following the mean between every two 
extreme opposites. For lukewarm water is neither hot nor cold, as though 
remote from both qualities. Thus, [a person] must not go to extremes 
either in holding onto property, whereby holding fast to wealth becomes 
embedded in him, or in spending so as to become a spendthrift. [Again,] 
30 a person should not shrink from all things so as to be a coward, nor plunge 
into all things so as to be reckless. Instead, he should seek generosity, 

Page 454: [No Text Extracted]

Page 455:
213 Discussion 20 
which is the mean between stinginess and overspending; courage, which 
is the mean between cowardice and recklessness; and so on with all moral 
dispositions. Ethics is [a] lengthy [discipline], and the religious law has 
gone to great lengths in giving its details.2 There is no way for cultivat-
5 ing morals3 except through observing in works the canon of the religious 
law so that man would not follow his whim, such that "he makes his 
caprice his god" [Qur3an 25:45; 45:22]. Rather, he must imitate the law, 
advancing or holding back [action], not as he chooses, [but] according to 
what [the law] directs, his moral dispositions becoming educated thereby. 
10 Whoever is deprived of this virtue in both moral disposition and knowl­
edge is the one who perishes, for this reason, God, exalted be He, said: 
"Whoever purifies it has achieved success, and whoever corrupts it fails" 
[Qur°an 91:9-10]. Whoever combines both virtues, the epistemological 
and the practical, is the worshipping "knower," the absolutely blissful 
15 one. Whoever has the epistemological virtue but not the practical is the 
knowledgeable, [believing] sinner who will be tormented for a period, 
which [torment] will not last because his soul had been perfected through 
knowledge but bodily occurrences had tarnished [it] in an accidental 
manner opposed to the substance of the soul. The causes renewing [these 
20 accidental occurrences! are [themselves] not renewed; consequently, 
with lengthy time [the tarnishing accidents] are obliterated. He who has 
practical virtue but not the epistemological is saved and delivered but 
does not attain perfect bliss. 
(16) [The philosophers further] claim that whoever dies is resurrected.4 
25 Regarding what has appeared in the religious law in terms of [sensible] 
representation, the intention [here] is to give analogies because of the 
failure [of most people] to understand these [intellectual] pleasures. They 
have thus been given examples in terms of what they understand, being 
then told that these pleasures are above what has been described to them. 
30 (17) This, then, is [the philosophers'] doctrine. 
(18) We say: 
(19) Most of these things are not contrary to the religious law. For we 
do not deny that there are, in the hereafter, kinds of pleasures superior 
to the sensory. Nor do we deny the survival of the soul after separation 
35 from the body. But we know this through the religious law, since it has 

Page 456: [No Text Extracted]

Page 457:
214 Discussion 20 
conveyed [that there is] resurrection. And the resurrection is only under­
stood in terms of the soul's survival. We have previously denied only their 
claim that they know this by reason alone. What is contrary to the reli­
gious law among [the things they hold] is the denial of the resurrection 
5 of bodies, the denial of bodily pleasures in paradise and bodily torments 
in the fire, and the denial of the existence of paradise and the fire as 
described in the Qur°an. What, then, is there to stand in the way of 
realizing the combination of both [kinds] of happiness, the spiritual 
and bodily, the same applying to misery, [in view] of His statement,5 
10 "No soul knows what has been hidden from them" [Qur'an 32:17]—that 
is, it does not know all that—and [the prophet's] saying, [conveying 
God's utterance,] "I have prepared for my righteous servants that which 
no eye has seen .. . "? As such, the existence of these noble things does not 
indicate the negation of others. Rather, combining the two represents 
15 what is more perfect, [rendering] the thing promised the most perfect of 
things. Moreover, this is possible; hence, belief in it (in accordance with 
the religious law) is obligatory. 
(20) [It may be] said: 
(21) What has come down in [the revealed law] are parables struck 
20 to meet the level of the understanding of created [humanity], in the same 
sense that the anthropomorphic verses and reports [of the prophet] that 
have come down are analogies proportionate to the understanding of 
created [humanity]. The divine attributes are sanctified [high above] 
what the commonality imagines. 
25 (22) [We] answer: 
(23) To make these two things equal is arbitrary. On the contrary, 
they differ in two respects. 
(24) One is that the anthropomorphic utterances are amenable to 
interpretation in accordance with the customary practice of the Arabs in 
30 using metaphor. But what has come down [in the law] describing par­
adise and the fire and the detailing of these states has attained a degree 
[of explicit statement] that does not [render it] subject to metaphorical 
interpretation. Nothing, then, would remain but to take [such utterances] 
as obfuscation by making one imagine what is contrary to truth for the 
35 benefit of creatures. But this is what the position of prophethood is sanc­
tified high above. 
(25) The second is that rational proofs have shown the impossibility 
of [attributing] place, direction, visage, physical hand, physical eye, the 
possibility of transfer, and rest to God, praise be to Him. Metaphorical 

Page 458: [No Text Extracted]

Page 459:
215 Discussion 20 
interpretation [here] is obligatory through rational proofs. What He has 
promised in the hereafter, however, is not impossible in terms of the 
power of God, exalted be He. Hence, one must follow the apparent [literal 
meaning of the revealed] speech—indeed, according to its signification, 
5 which is explicit. 
(26) If it is said, "Rational proof has shown the impossibility of the res­
urrection of bodies, just as it has shown the impossibility of applying those 
[anthropomorphic] attributes to God, exalted be He," we would demand 
of them to bring forth [this proof]. In this they have different ways. 
[(1)J 
10 (27) The first is their statement that the supposition of the return 
[of souls] to bodies does not go beyond [involving] three alternatives. 
(28) [The first alternative] is to say [that] the human consists of 
body and life, which is an accident subsisting therein, as some theolo­
gians have held; that a self-subsisting soul that manages the body has no 
15 existence; that the meaning of death is the severance of life—that is, 
the refraining of the Creator from creating it, whereby it ceases to exist, 
the body also ceasing to exist; [and] that the meaning of the resurrec­
tion is God's returning the annihilated body back to existence and the 
returning of the life which had been annihilated; or else, to say that the 
20 matter of the body survives as earth and that the meaning of the resur­
rection is that [this earth] is gathered and constructed in the form of a 
human, life then being created in it anew. This [then] is one alternative. 
(29) [A second alternative] is to say that the soul exists and survives 
death but that the first body is changed back [into existence] with all its 
25 very parts. This is another alternative. 
(30) [A third alternative] is to say that the soul would be returned to 
a body, regardless of whether [the body] is reconstituted from those 
[original bodily] parts or [formed] from other [parts]. The [person] res­
urrected would be that [identical] human inasmuch as the soul would 
30 be that [same] soul. As regards matter, no attention should be given it, 
since the human is not a human because of it, but by virtue of the soul. 
(31) All these three alternatives [they argue] are false: 
(32) In the case of the first, its falsity is clear. For once life and the 
body become annihilated, then the commencing of their creation would 
35 consist of bringing into existence a replica of what had been, not what is 
identical with what had been.6 Indeed, what is [normally] understood by 

Page 460: [No Text Extracted]

Page 461:
216 Discussion 20 
"the return" is [that circumstance] where one supposes the endurance of 
something and a renewed existence of something. [This is] just as, when 
one says, "So-and-so returned to being generous," it means that the gener­
ous person continues to exist, abandoned being generous, then returned to 
5 [this state]—that is, he returned to the initial [state] in terms of genus, 
but [the state itself] is numerically other. It would thus be in reality a 
return to what is similar, not to the same thing. [Again,] it is [also] said 
that So-and-so returned to the town—that is, [after having] existed out­
side [it], having [previously] had an existence in the town, he then 
10 returned to what is similar to this [previous state]. Thus, unless there is 
something that [continues to] exist, there [also] being numerically two 
things that are similar [but] separated by time, then [the meaning of] 
the term "return" is not fulfilled, unless one follows the doctrine of the 
Muctazila, where it would be said: "The nonexistent is a thing that is 
15 permanent, existence being a state that occurs to it at one time, ceases 
for a while, and returns at another. The meaning of 'return' would thus 
be fulfilled through the consideration of the continuance of [nonexistence, 
which is a pure negative, as an] entity."7 But this would be the removal of 
absolute nonexistence and an affirmation of [an] entity as being continuous 
20 until existence returns to it, which is impossible. 
(33) If one supporting this alternative [the philosophers continue] 
resorts to a device [for resolving this difficulty] by saying, "The body's 
earth does not cease to exist and thus continues to be, and life is then 
returned to it," we say: 
25 (34) At this point it would be correct to say that the earth has 
returned to an animated state after life had been severed from it. This, 
however, would not be a resurrection for the human nor a return [to life] 
of that identical human being. For the human is a human not by virtue 
of his matter and the earth that is in him, since all or most of [his] parts 
30 are changed for him through nourishment while he remains that very 
same individual. For he is what he is by virtue of his spirit or soul. If, 
then, life or spirit ceases to exist, then the return of what ceases to exist 
is unintelligible. What commences to exist is only that which is similar 
to it. And whenever God creates human life in earth that derives from 
35 the body of a tree, a horse, or a plant, this would be a creation anew of a 
human. The return to existence of the nonexistent is utterly unintelligible. 
That which returns is the existent; that is, it returns to a state which it 
previously had—in other words, to a state similar to [the previous] state. 
What, then, returns is [the capacity] of earth to [possess] the attribute of 
40 life. A human is [not a human] by virtue of his body, since the body 

Page 462: [No Text Extracted]

Page 463:
217 Discussion 20 
of a horse may become the food for a human from which a sperm may be 
generated from which [in turn] a human may come to be. It is not said 
that the horse has changed into a human. Rather, a horse is a horse by 
virtue of its form, not its matter; [and] the form has now ceased, matter 
5 alone remaining. 
(35) As regards the second alternative, which is the supposition of 
the survival of the soul and the returning of it to that very same body, 
[this,] if conceivable, would be a return—that is, a return [of the soul] to 
managing the body after having separated from it. But this is impossible, 
10 since the body of the dead person disintegrates into earth or is eaten by 
worms or birds and changes into blood, vapor, and air, mixing with the 
world's air, vapor, and water in a manner that renders its extraction and 
retrieval remote. But if this [extraction and retrieval] is supposed by 
trusting in God's power, then [one of two alternatives would necessarily 
15 follow]. [The first is] that only the parts of the person's body existing at 
the time of his death are gathered. Thus, the resurrection of the person 
with the severed limb, the severed nose and ear, and the defective organs 
would have to be [a return to the physical state such a person] had had. 
This is deemed bad, particularly for the people in paradise who were 
20 created imperfect at the beginning of [their] creation. To bring them 
back to the state of emaciation they were in when they died would con­
stitute an extreme in punishment—this, if confined to gathering the 
parts existing at [the moment] of death. 
(36) If, however [and this is the second alternative], all the parts of 
25 the body that existed throughout the life of [the deceased] are gathered, 
this would be impossible in two respects: one is that, if a human eats the 
flesh of another human, which is customary in some lands and becomes 
frequent in times of famine, the [bodily] resurrection of both together 
becomes impossible because one substance was the body of the individ-
30 ual eaten and has become, through eating, [part of] the body of the 
eater. And it is impossible to return two souls to the same body. The sec­
ond is that one and the same part would have to be resurrected as liver, 
heart, and leg. For it has been proved by the medical art that some 
organic parts derive nourishment from the residuary nourishment of the 
35 others. Thus, the liver feeds on parts of the heart, the same being the case 
with the rest of the organs. Let us then suppose that individual parts had 
been the matter of several organs. To which organ, then, would it be 
returned [at the resurrection]? Indeed, there is no need to establish the 
impossibility of the first [alternative] by reference to cannibalism. For, if 

Page 464: [No Text Extracted]

Page 465:
218 Discussion 20 
you consider the surface of the inhabited earth, you would know that with 
the long passage of time its soil consists of corpses that have changed into 
soil that is seeded and planted, becoming grain and fruit that animals 
eat, and so becoming flesh which we eat, thus returning as bodies for us. 
5 Thus, there is no matter to which one points but would have been a body 
for many humans, changed and transformed into soil, then to plant, then 
to flesh, then to animal. From this [supposition] a third impossible conse­
quence indeed ensues. This is that the [human] souls separating from 
bodies are infinite, whereas bodies are finite corporeal entities. Thus, 
10 the materials which had been the materials of humans would not be 
sufficient for the souls of all people; they would not accommodate them.8 
(37) As regards the third alternative—namely, returning the soul to 
a human body composed of any matter whatsoever and whatever soil— 
this would be impossible in two respects: one of them is that the materials 
15 receptive of generation and corruption are confined to the sphere of the 
moon, increment being impossible for them. They are finite, whereas 
the souls separating from bodies are infinite. Hence, the materials would 
not be sufficient for them.9 The second is that earth, as long as it remains 
earth, is not receptive to being managed by the soul. Rather, the elements 
20 need to be mixed in a manner similar to the composition of the sperm. 
Indeed, wood and iron are not receptive of this management, and it is 
impossible to return the human and his body [to life] from wood or iron. 
On the contrary, he would not be a human unless the parts of his body 
divide into flesh, bone, and [the four] humors. [Now,] once the body and its 
25 temperament become disposed to receive a soul, they become deserving 
of the creation of a soul by the principles that bestow souls. But [if the 
third alternative is supposed], then two souls will come to the one body. 
It is with this [as a consequence] that the doctrine of transmigration is 
refuted.10 [The view supposed in the third alternative], however, would 
30 constitute the very [doctrine of] transmigration. For it reduces to the soul's 
preoccupation—after being delivered from one body—with directing 
another body [that is] other than the first body. Hence, the method adopted 
to refute transmigration proves the falsity of this [third] approach. 
(38) [Our] objection [to all this] is to say: 

Page 466: [No Text Extracted]

Page 467:
219 Discussion 20 
(39) With what [argument] would you deny one who chooses the last 
alternative and holds the view that the soul survives death, it being a 
self-subsisting substance? This is not contrary to the religious law. On 
the contrary, the religious law indicates this in His saying: "Do not think 
J that those who have been killed in the way of God are dead, but [they] are 
living with their Lord . . ." [Qur'an 3:163] and in the saying [of the 
Prophet], peace be upon him, "The spirits of the righteous are in the 
crops of green birds that hang beneath the throne," [as well as] by what 
has been conveyed to us by the reports of the spirits' awareness of chari-
10 table deeds, of the questioning [in the grave] by Munkar and Nakir, of 
the torment in the grave and other things, all of which indicates [the 
soul's] survival. Yes, in addition, [this] indicates the revival and resurrec­
tion thereafter—namely, the resurrection of the body. This is possible by 
returning [the soul] to the body, whatever body this might be, whether 
15 [composed] of the matter of the first body [or from that] of another or 
from matter whose creation commences anew. For [an individual] is 
what he is by virtue of his soul, not his body, since the parts of the body 
change over for him from childhood to old age through being emaciated, 
becoming fat, and [undergoing] change of nourishment. His tempera-
20 ment changes with [all] this, while yet remaining that very same human. 
This lies within God's power and would be a [true] return of that soul. 
For [with the separation of the soul from the body] it had become not 
feasible for him to undergo physical pain and pleasure due to the loss of 
the instrument. But now an instrument similar to the first has been 
25 returned to him. This, then, becomes true resurrection. 
(40) And what you [philosophers] have mentioned about the impos­
sibility of this in that the souls would be infinite, the materials being 
finite, is [itself] impossible, having no basis. For it is built on [the doctrine 
of] the world's pre-eternity and the perpetual succession of the [celestial] 
30 circular motions. For one who does not believe in the world's eternity, the 
souls that separate from bodies are finite and are not greater than the 
existing materials. And if [for the sake of argument] one admits that 
[their number is] greater, God, exalted be He, is able to create and resume 
the creation ex nihilo.11 To deny this is to deny God's power of temporal 
35 origination. A refutation [of such a denial] has been given previously in 
the discussion of the world's creation. 

Page 468: [No Text Extracted]

Page 469:
220 Discussion 20 
(41) As regards your second [claim of] rendering [the third alterna­
tive] impossible, in that this constitutes transmigration, there is no need 
to squabble about terms. What the religious law has conveyed [as true] 
must be believed. Let it be "transmigration." We only deny transmigra-
5 tion in this world. As regards the resurrection, we do not deny [it], 
whether or not it is called "transmigration." 
(42) And your statement that every bodily composition that is pre­
pared to receive a soul deserves the creation of a soul [for it] from the 
[celestial] principles is to revert to [the doctrine] of the soul's creation by 
JO nature, not voluntarily. We have refuted this in the discussion of the 
world's creation. How not so, when it is not unlikely in terms of the pat­
tern of your [own] doctrine also to say that [a body] deserves the creation 
of a soul only if there is no soul [already] existing, so that a soul com­
mences to be? There would remain [for the philosophers] to say: "Why 
15 is it [then] that it is [only] in this, our [present] world, that the souls 
attach to the bodily compositions in the wombs prepared for their recep­
tion, but not (thereafter], prior to the revival and the resurrection?"—to 
which it would be said: 
(43) It may well be [the case] that the separated souls [in rejoining 
20 the resurrected body] require a different kind of preparation whose cause 
becomes complete only at that time. It is [hardly] improbable for the 
preparation which is a condition for the perfect separated soul [to rejoin 
the body] to be different from the preparation which is a condition for 
[the coming to be of] the soul that is initially created [and] which has 
25 not acquired perfection through managing the body for a period of time, 
(iod, exalted be He, knows best these conditions, their causes, and the 
times of their presence. The religious law has declared [the resurrection]. 
It is [in itself] possible and, hence, must be believed. 
[(2)] 
(44) [The philosophers'] second way is that they say: 
30 (45) It is not within the realm of [divine] capability for iron to be 
transformed into a woven garment which one would wear as a turban, 
except through the decomposition of the particles of iron into [basic] 
elements by causes that control iron and decompose it into simple 
elements. The elements are then gathered and made to go through phases 
35 of creation until they acquire the form of cotton. Then cotton would 
acquire the form of yarn, yarn acquiring the known order—namely, being 
woven in a known shape. If it is said that changing iron into a cotton 

Page 470: [No Text Extracted]

Page 471:
221 Discussion 20 
turban is possible, without transformation through these stages accord­
ing to an order, [this would be asserting what is] impossible. Yes, a human 
can entertain the thought that these transformations can all be realized 
in a short time, whose length man would not perceive, and he would 
5 think that this occurred suddenly and all at once. 
(46) If this is understood, then, if the body of the resurrected human 
were of stone, ruby, pearl, or pure earth, he would not be a human. 
Indeed, it is not conceivable that he would be a human unless he has a 
special shape formed from bones, veins, flesh, cartilages, and humors. 
10 The simple parts are prior to the complex. Hence, there would be no 
body if there were no organs, and there would be no compound organs if 
there were no bones, flesh, and veins; and these single things would not 
be if there were no humors; and there would not be the four humors if 
their matters did not consist of food, and there would be no food unless 
15 there were animal or plant—namely, flesh and seeds—and there would 
be no animals and plants if all the four elements were not mixed accord­
ing to lengthy particular conditions, greater than the general treatment 
we have detailed. Hence, it is not possible for the body of a human to be 
reformed anew so that the soul would be returned to it except through 
20 these things, which have many causes. Does soil, then, turn into a human 
by [one] saying to it, "Be," or by preparing the causes of its transforma­
tion through these phases? The causes [of its transformation] consist in 
placing the sperm extracted from the core of the human body into a 
womb so that it would derive from the blood of the menses and from 
25 nourishment for a period until it is created into a lump, then a clot, then 
a fetus, then an infant, then a youth, then an old man. Hence, one's say­
ing that it is said to it, "Be," is unintelligible, since earth is not addressed 
and its transformation into a human without undergoing these phases is 
impossible. And for it to undergo these stages without these causes run-
30 ning their course is impossible. Hence, [bodily] resurrection is impossible. 
(47) [Our] objection [to this is as follows]: 

Page 472: [No Text Extracted]

Page 473:
222 Discussion 20 
(48) We admit that ascending through these stages is necessary for 
[the earth] to become a human body, just as it is necessary for iron to 
become a turban. For if it remains iron, it would not become a garment. 
Indeed, it must [first] become spun cotton, then [be] woven. But this is 
5 possible either in a moment or a [longer] period of time. It has not been 
made plain to us that the resurrection takes place in the shortest possible 
time, since it is possible that recollecting the bones, reviving the flesh, 
and making them grow takes place in a long period of time. But this 
is not the point at issue. [The question] to be examined, however, is 
10 concerned with the progress of these stages—whether it occurs purely 
through [divine] power, without mediation, or through some cause or 
another. Both [explanations], according to us, are possible, as we have 
mentioned in the first question in the natural sciences when discussing 
[God's] making [all events] run according to a habitual course. [There 
15 we stated] that the connection of connected things in existence is not by 
way of necessity, but that habitual [patterns] can be disrupted, whereby 
these matters would come about through God's power without the exis­
tence of their causes. The second [view] consists of our saying that this is 
due to causes, but it is not a condition that the cause [here] would be one 
20 which we have experienced. Rather, in the treasury of things [enactable 
by divine] power there are unknown wondrous and strange things denied 
by someone who thinks that nothing exists but what he experiences, in 
the same way that some people deny magic, sorcery, the talismanic arts, 
[prophetic] miracles, and the miracles [of saints], which are affirmed, as 
25 all agree, through strange unknowable causes. Indeed, if a human had 
never seen a magnet and its attraction of iron and this [fact] is related to 
him, he would deny it, saying, "No attraction of iron is conceivable except 
through a string attached to it and then pulled, for this is what is observed 
in [things] being pulled." However, when he sees [the magnet's attraction 
30 of iron], he would be astounded by it and would realize that his knowl­
edge falls short of encompassing the wonders of [divine] power. 
(49) And it is thus with the atheists who deny the resurrection and 
the hereafter. When they are resurrected from the graves and see the 
wonders of God in [resurrecting man], they will suffer regret that will 
35 not do them any good, feeling sorry for their ingratitude—a sorrow of no 
benefit to them. And it will be said to them, "This is the thing which you 

Page 474: [No Text Extracted]

Page 475:
223 Discussion 20 
used to deem untrue" [Qur3an 83:17], being like the one who deemed 
false the [existence] of [hidden] properties and wondrous things. Indeed, 
if a human is created rational from the very beginning and it is said to 
him, "This dirty sperm, whose parts are similar, will have its similar 
5 parts divide in the womb of a woman [to form] different organs, by way 
of flesh, nerves, bones, veins, cartilages, and fat, from which there comes 
to be the eye (with seven layers differing in constitution), the tongue, the 
teeth (with the differences between them, despite their proximity, in 
being soft or hard), and so on to the wonders of creation," his denial will 
10 be [even] stronger than the denial of the atheists who said: "When we 
were moldy bones . . ." [QurDan 29:11]. 
(50) The one who denies the resurrection does not give thought to 
[the question] of how he would know the confining of the causes of exis­
tence to what he has observed. For it is not improbable that in the resur-
15 rection of bodies there is a pattern other than what he observes. In some 
(of the traditional] reports it is said that at the time of the resurrection 
(here would cover the earth rain whose drops are akin to sperm and will 
mix with the earth. What improbability is there for there being among 
the divine causes something similar to this, which we do not know, that 
20 results in the resurrection of bodies and their being rendered disposed 
to receive the resurrected souls? Is there any basis for this denial other 
than merely thinking it unlikely? 
(51) [The philosophers] may [then] say: 
(52) The divine act has one fixed course that does not change. For 
25 this reason God, exalted be He, said: "Our command is but one, like 
the flicker of the eye" [Qur°an 54:50], and He has [also] said: "You will 
not find any change in God's way" [Qur3an 48:23]. And these causes 
whose possibility you have imagined, if they exist [at all], ought also to 
have sequences and would have to repeat themselves infinitely, and the 
30 order of generating and being generated [continue] without end. After 
acknowledging repetitions and cyclical occurrences, it is not improbable 
that the pattern of things should change in a million years, for example; 
but the change would also be eternal, permanent, [according to] one law. 
For there is no change in God's way. This is the case because the divine 

Page 476: [No Text Extracted]

Page 477:
224 Discussion 20 
act proceeds from the divine will, and the divine will does not have a 
multiple direction so as to have its order change with the change of its 
directions. Thus, what proceeds from it, however [it proceeds], will have 
an order that combines the first and last according to one pattern, as 
5 we see it in other causes and effects. 
(53) If you allow the continuous generation and procreation in the 
manner now observed or the return of this pattern, even after a long 
time, by way of repetition and cyclical change, you have removed the res­
urrection, the end of the world, and what the apparent [meanings] of the 
10 religious law indicate, since it would follow that our existence would have 
been preceded by this resurrection several times and will return several 
times and so on, according to this order. If you said that the divine way 
changes entirely to another genus, this [way] never at all returning, and 
the period of possibility divides into three divisions—a division before 
15 the creation of the world when God was and there was no world, a divi­
sion after creation in the manner [we have now], and a part with which 
there is a termination (namely, the pattern of resurrection)—then har­
mony and order cease and change in God's way takes place, which is 
impossible. For this is only possible with a will that changes with the 
20 change of circumstances. But the eternal will has one fixed course from 
which it does not alter. For the [divine] act accords with the will, and the 
will is of one pattern that does not change in relation to periods of time. 
(54) [The philosophers further] claim that this does not contradict 
our statement that God has power over all things. For [they maintain that] 
25 we say that God is capable of [bringing about] the resurrection, the 
afterlife, and all possible things in the sense that if He willed them He 
would enact [them]. It is not a condition of the truth of this, our state­
ment, that He wills, nor that He acts. This is just as we say that So-and-
so is capable of cutting his own throat and stabbing his [own] belly, 
30 this being true in the sense that had he willed this he would have done it. 
But we know that he neither wills nor does [it]. Our saying, "He neither 
wills nor acts," does not contradict our statement that he is capable in 
the sense that, had he willed, he would have enacted [the deed]. For the 

Page 478: [No Text Extracted]

Page 479:
225 Discussion 20 
categorical statements do not contradict the hypothetical, as has been 
stated in logic. For our statement, "If he willed, he would have acted," is 
an affirmative hypothetical [statement], whereas our saying, "He did not 
will and he did not act," constitutes two negative categorical statements. 
5 The categorical negative statement does not contradict the affirmative 
hypothetical [one]. Hence, the proof that shows us that His will is eter­
nal and not varied shows us that the course of the divine decree will only 
be in accordance with an ordered [pattern] and [that], if it varies in indi­
vidual times, its variance would also be according to order and a regular 
10 pattern through [eternal] repetition and recurrence. [Anything] other 
than this is impossible. 
(55) [Our] answer [to this is to say]: 
(56) This derives from [their doctrine] of the world's eternity and 
[their argument] that the [divine] will is eternal so that the world is 
15 eternal. We have refuted this and shown that it is not rationally improb­
able to posit three divisions—namely, that God exists without the world, 
that he then creates the world according to the order we experience, and 
[that he] then begins a new order which is the one promised in paradise. 
The whole, then, could be annihilated so that nothing would remain save 
20 God. This [latter] is possible, except that the religious law has conveyed 
[its opposite—namely,] that reward, punishment, paradise, and the fire 
have no end. And this question, in whatever way it turns, is based on two 
ciucstions. The first is the world's temporal origination and the possibility 
of the proceeding of a temporal thing from an eternal [one]; the second 
25 is the disruption of the habitual [course of nature] by creating the effects 
without causes or creating causes on another pattern that is not custom­
ary. We have settled both these questions. 

Page 480: [No Text Extracted]

Page 481:
The Book's Conclusion 
(1) If someone says: "You have explained the doctrines of these 
[philosophers]; do you then say conclusively that they are infidels and 
that the killing of those who uphold their beliefs is obligatory?" we say: 
(2) Pronouncing them infidels is necessary in three questions. One 
of them is the question of the world's pre-eternity and their statement 
that all substances are pre-eternal. The second is their statement that 
God's knowledge does not encompass the temporal particulars among 
individual [existents]. The third is their denial of the resurrection of 
bodies and their assembly at the day of judgment. 
(3) These three doctrines do not agree with Islam in any respect. The 
one who believes them believes that prophets utter falsehoods and that 
they said whatever they have said by way of [promoting common] utility, 
to give examples and explanation to the multitudes of created mankind. 
This is manifest infidelity which none of the Islamic sects have believed. 
(4) As regards questions other than these three, such as their treatment 
of the divine attributes and their belief in divine unity entailed therein, 
their doctrine is close to that of the Muctazila. Their doctrine of the neces­
sary [connection] of natural causes [and their effects] is the one which 
the Muctazila have explicitly expressed in [their doctrine of] generation. 
Similarly, all of what we have reported [of their doctrines] has been held 
by one or another of the Islamic sects, with the exception of these three 
principles. Whoever perceives the heretical innovators among the Islamic 
-226-

Page 482: [No Text Extracted]

Page 483:
227 The Book's Conclusion 
sects to be infidels will pronounce [the philosophers] also to be infidels 
[for the views they share]. And whoever hesitates in pronouncing [such 
Islamic sectarian innovators] as infidels will confine himself to pro­
nouncing [the philosophers] infidels on these [three] questions [alone]. 
5 We, however, prefer not to plunge into [the questions] of pronouncing 
those who uphold heretical innovation to be infidels1 and of which pro­
nouncement is valid and which is not, lest the discourse should stray 
from the objective of this book. God, exalted be He, is the One who leads 
one successfully to what is correct. 
• • • 

Page 484: [No Text Extracted]

Page 485:
Notes to the English Text 
Avicenna, Ahwal 
Avicenna, Al-nafs 
Avicenna, Isagoge 
Avicenna, 
Avicenna, 
Avicenna, 
Dunya 
Iqtisad 
Micyar Ishardt 
Metaphysics 
Najat Abbreviations 
Ibn Sina. Ahwal al-nafs. Ed. F. Ahwani. Cairo: Dar 
Ihya al-Kutub al-cArabiyah, 1952. 
Ibn Sina. Al-shifa' (Healing): Al-tahiLiyydt (Physics): 
Al-nafs (De Anima). Ed. G. C. Anawati and S. Zayed. 
Cairo: [Wizarat al-Macarif], 1975. 
Ibn Sina. Al-shifa'' (Healing): Al-mantiq (Logic): Al-
madkhal (Isagoge). Ed. M. Khudayri, G. C. Anawati, and 
A. F. Ahwani. Cairo: [Wizarat al-Macarif], 1953. 
Ibn Sina. Kitdb al-ishdrdt wa al-lanbihdt. Ed. J. Forget. 
Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1892. 
Ibn Sina. Al-shifa' (Healing): Al-ildhiyydt (Meta­
physics). Ed. G. C. Anawati, S. Dunya, M. Y. Musa, 
and S. Zayed. 2 vols. Cairo: [Wizarat al-Macarif], 1960. 
Ibn Sina, Al-najat. Cairo: MatbaLat al-Salada, 1938. 
Al-Ghazali. Tahaful al-faldsifa. Ed. S. Dunya. Cairo: 
Dar al-Macarif, 1957. 
Al-Ghazali. Al-iqtisdd fi al-ictiqdd. Ed. I. A. Cubkgu 
and H. Atay. Ankara: Nur Matbaasi, 1962. 
Al-Ghazali. Mi 'ydr al- cilm. Ed. S. Dunya. Cairo: Dar 
al-Macarif, 1961. 
Author's Introduction 
1. The reference could be either to the group of unbelievers, to those who 
have deviated from true Islamic teaching, or to the Jews and Christians. The 
text does not make this clear. 
-229-

Page 486:
230 Notes to Discussion 1 
2. This third theological group is not easy to identify. The tenth-century 
geographer al-Muqaddasi identifies al-wdqifiyya with those who were undecided 
concerning the Qur°an, presumably on the question of whether it is created or 
eternal. Al-Muqaddasi, Kitab ahsan al-taqdsimfi macrifat al-aqdlim, ed. M.J. de 
Goeje (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1906), 38. 
3. Fa al-nusallim lahum jamica dhdlika jadalan aw iHiqddan: Here appears 
the idea of admitting a premise to the opponent which, in this instance, could 
be admitted either dialectically—that is, for the sake of argument—or out of 
conviction, or both. 
4. The title of the logical work appended to the Tahdfut. 
5. Min jumlatihi: The reference seems to be to al-nazar fi dlat al-fikr, 
"examining the instruments of thought." S. Dunya suggests that this refers to 
the Tahdfut—that is, that Mi cydr al-cilm (The standard for knowledge) is part 
of this work. See the introduction to Micydr al-cilm, p. 21. This interpretation, 
while possible, is not certain. 
Discussion 1 , 
1. As will be seen, there are actually four proofs. 
2. It is almost certain that the reference here is to the will, not to the world. 
But the expression is not without ambiguity. 
3. See Avicenna, Metaphysics, 9.1 (pp. 376 ff.). 
4. Literally, "if it is said . . . , we answer . . ." This is the pattern of state­
ment and answer throughout the Tahdfut. But the conditional sentences usu­
ally involve lengthy discussions, and for the sake of intelligibility I resort most 
of the time to the pattern suggested by the translation above. 
5. The terminology at this stage is that of the kaldm, but it shifts to philo­
sophical usage once the notion of the middle term is introduced. Knowledge by 
the necessity of reason (darurat al-caql) is indubitable direct knowledge that 
includes self-evident truths (and this is what al-Ghazali has in mind here) and 
knowledge of our own existence and of our own psychological states, as well as 
knowledge habitually referred to as coming to us directly through sense per­
ception—although for the Islamic occasionahst this latter knowledge is also 
created in us by God. Reflection (na^ar) is knowledge rationally inferred from 
the former. See al-Baqillani, Kitab al-tamhid, ed. R.J. McCarthy (Beirut: Al-
Maktabah al-Sharqiyah, 1957), 7-13; also M. E. Marmura, "Ghazali's Attitude 
to the Secular Sciences and Logic," in Essays on Islamic Philosophy and Science, ed. 
G.F. Hourani (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1957), 103-5. 
6. Al-Ghazali here is voicing the doctrine of the Ashcarite school of kaldm, 
to which he belongs; it held that the divine eternal attributes are not identical 
with the divine essence but "additional to it." 
7. Literally, "when it is not impossible for the priority and posteriority to be 
willed." 
8. Literally, "sufficiency would take place with power." 
9. Hddhd camalu tawahhumika: Literally, "this is the work of your estimation." 
The reference here is to al-wahm, "estimation." Al-Ghazali is using Avicennan 
terminology. According to Avicenna, estimation is a reasoning faculty whose 

Page 487:
Notes to Discussion 1 231 
function, unlike theoretical reasoning, is to make particular judgments in terms 
of the particulars of sense. It is, however, incapable of abstract and universal 
thought. When it attempts to make judgments about nonsensible particulars, 
it is prone to err. Implicit in the statement above is that wahm, incapable of fol­
lowing the abstract argument that God is neither inside nor outside the world, 
errs when it maintains that He has spatial existence. Avicenna also attributes 
to animals a faculty of estimation—an internal sense which, for example, 
enables a ewe to apprehend the nonmaterial meaning (macnd, or "enmity") in 
the wolf. 
10. Wafarduhu mumkin: The underlying argument here seems to be that 
what is self-contradictory cannot be supposed. But since one can suppose the 
equality in relation to the individual's purpose, this equality is possible; hence, 
contrary to what the philosophers hold, it is not inconceivable. 
11. Thdbita, which can also mean "constant," as used in al-Ghazali's reply 
that immediately follows. But here the term is used primarily for establishing 
the conclusion of the hypothetical syllogism: "If there are events in the world, 
there must be an [eternal] circular motion; there are events in the world; 
therefore, there is an eternal circular motion." 
12. Mukhtaracatun li'lldhi ibtiddcan: The wording here is quite significant, 
as al-Ghazali voices the Ashcarite occasionalist doctrine that each and every 
event is the direct, unmediated creation of God "invented" by Him ex nihilo. 
The refutation of the doctrine that the celestial sphere is an animal is given in 
Discussion 14. 
13. For the disjunctive form of this proof and an analysis of it, see M. E. 
Marmura, "The Logical Role of the Argument from Time in the Tahdfut's 
Second Proof for the World's Pre-eternity," The Muslim World 49, no. 4 (1959): 
306-14. 
14. What follows is a lengthy, complex sentence. It starts with kamajdzfl— 
literally, "just as it is permissible"—and is complemented five subordinate 
sentences later in the above translation by "similarly." For the sake of clarity, 
the initial kamd has been omitted in the translation and the complex sentence 
broken into shorter sentences. 
15. That is, the hypothesized space between the original size of the world 
and the hypothesized world smaller by a cubit or two would constitute a void. 
16. For a background to this argument, see Avicenna., Metaphysics, 4.2.7-15 
(p. 182). "Every idea that exists," Avicenna writes, "either exists or does not 
exist in a subject. Whatever does not exist in a subject has a proper existence 
in terms of which it is not necessarily related. But the possible of existence is 
only [what] it is in relation to that of which it is possible." It is in this context 
that al-Ghazali speaks of "the possibility of existence" above as "a relative char­
acterization." Avicenna's "proper existence" or "special existence"—the esse 
proprium, "proper being," of his Latin translators—is distinct from al-wujud 
al-ithbati, "affirmative existence." The former is, in effect, a reference to the 
nature of a thing, regardless of whether or not it exists. 
17. In other words, knowledge corresponds to the object as the object actu­
ally is. This is what makes it "knowledge." This definition is also encountered 
in the kaldm. 

Page 488:
232 Notes to Discussion 2 
18. Hay'a is a difficult term to translate. It could be translated as "form," 
provided that this is taken in a very general sense. Normally it means "shape" 
and, in astronomical contexts, "configuration." 
19. The point here is that possibility can be related to what is non-
material—in this case, God. 
20. As pointed out in the introduction, QawdHd al-aqd'id is the title of one 
of the books of al-Ghazali's magnum opus, his Ihyd' culum al-din (The revivifi­
cation of the sciences of religion). The Qawdcid is an Ashcarite work but is not 
too detailed and does not discuss the question of the world's origin at great 
length. This question is quite fully treated in al-Ghazali's Al-iqtisddfi al-ictiqdd 
(Moderation in belief), his main Ashcarite work, written shortly after the 
Tahdjut, in which we are told that it is concerned with the "principles of reli­
gion," although it is not referred to by its title. It is in the Iqtisdd rather than 
the Qawdcid that al-Ghazali fulfills the promise of "affirming" true belief. For 
a pertinent discussion of the dating of this work and its relation to the Tahqfut, 
see G. F. Hourani, "The Chronology of Ghazali's Writings,"younW of the Amer­
ican Oriental Society 79, no. 4 (October-December 1959): 228; G. F. Hourani, 
"A Revised Chronology of Ghazali's Writings," Journal of the American Oriental 
Society 104, no. 2 (April-June 1984): 293-94. Al-Ghazali himself, in his Jawdhir 
al-Qur'dn (The gems of the Qur3an), intimates that, of the two Ashcarite 
works, the Iqtisdd is the deeper. Al-Ghazali, Jawdhir al-Qur'dn, ed. M. R. R. 
al-Qabbani (Beirut: Dar Ihya' al-cUlum, 1986), 39. 
Discussion 2 
1. Yajuz an: "It is permitted that." There seems to be a shift of modality 
here from the original argument—a shift from necessity to possibility. 
2. The leading Muctazilite theologian of the school of Basra (d. ca. 840). 
3. That is, God would not be able to annihilate one thing without annihi­
lating the rest of the world. 
4. Lama tusuwwira fand'uhd li hddhd al-ma'na: The reference here seems 
to be to "endurance." In other words, the very meaning of "endurance" would 
exclude the meaning of "annihilation," so annihilation becomes inconceivable 
when, in fact, it is conceivable. It is possible, though perhaps less natural, 
to read li hddhd al-macnd as referring to the accidents, where "accident" by 
definition is that which does not endure. Thus, the sentence could translate 
(somewhat elliptically) as: "For if their enduring is conceivable, then their 
annihilation, because of the [very] meaning [of 'accident'], would become 
inconceivable[—which is absurd]." But whether or not this is what is meant, 
the Ashcarite definition of "accident" as that which does not endure underlies 
the argument. For this definition, see al-Baqillani, Al-tamhid, 1.4 (p. 18). 
5. Although al-Ghazali does not choose to answer the philosophers by 
defending any of these theological doctrines, it is this second Ashcarite doc­
trine, explaining how accidents and atoms cease to exist, to which he sub­
scribes in Iqtisdd, 37. 
6. See, for example, Avicenna, Al-nafs, 5.4 (pp. 205-7). 

Page 489:
Notts to Discussion 3 233 
Discussion 3 
1. For this Avicennan argument, see, in particular, Avicenna, Najat, 213-14. 
2. See Avicenna, Metaphysics, 6.1 (p. 261) and 6.2 (p. 263). Al-Ghazali is 
making the philosophers attribute to the theologians a position held by 
Avicenna, but with a twist. Avicenna's point is that for the building to endure 
there must be a sustaining cause coexisting with the effect: in this case, not 
the original efficient cause—the builder—but the water and dryness that acts 
to keep the original structure. 
3. What al-Ghazali has in mind is the example he had just given of the 
attribute Knowledge's being the cause of God's being a Knower. But he also 
seems to have in mind the relation of the divine attributes to each other. The 
eternal attribute Life, for example, is a necessary condition for the eternal 
attribute Knowledge (since without life, there can be no knowledge), but the 
divine attribute Knowledge is not in any real sense an act of the divine 
attribute Life. The divine eternal attribute Knowledge is not the enactment of 
the divine eternal attribute Life for the very reason that both are eternal and, 
hence, uncreated. 
4. The reference could be to primary matter which, in the Avicennan system, 
is the first effect of the last of the series of intelligences emanating from God, 
the Active Intellect (Avicenna, Metaphysics, 10.1 [p. 435]), unless in this instance 
"first matter" refers to the matter of the outermost sphere of the world. 
5. For Avicenna, each celestial intellect is in fact the only member of its 
species—a cardinal point for understanding his theory that God knows partic­
ulars "in a universal way." 
6. In other words, it is necessary for it to apprehend the First Principle, but 
this necessity does not derive from the First Principle; consequently, it does 
not constitute any plurality in this Principle. 
7. That is, if existence is a general concept that divides into the necessary 
and the possible. 
8. Al-wahid al-haqq: There is ambiguity here, as this phrase could refer 
either to God or to whatever is one in every respect. The argument that follows 
is cryptic and not entirely clear. One has to keep in mind, however, what has 
been stated earlier to the effect that existence is a general concept that divides 
into the necessary and the possible. What al-Ghazali seems to be speaking 
about here is the possible in itself and the necessary in Himself. Thus, if I 
understand his position correctly, he is arguing (a) that, if the philosophers 
want to maintain that the idea of the possible in an existent that is possible 
in itself is not identical with its existence, then the same must apply to the 
necessary in itself; and (b) that, should this be the case, then the necessary 
in itself would not be one in every respect, which is absurd. To be one in 
every respect, one cannot affirm one aspect of this unity and deny another 
without contradiction. This is the test for true unity. The thrust of the argu­
ment is to show that the "possibility" of the first effect cannot constitute the 
idea of plurality. 
9. Al-Caql: "Intellect," but also the masdar, or verbal noun, of caqala (the act 
of intellectual apprehension) which, in the case of God, is an eternal act. 

Page 490:
234 Notes to Discussion 4 
10. At first sight, what follows seems to be a continuation of the Avicennan 
criticism. Part of the content of the criticism—namely, that the effect would 
be nobler than the cause in that from the cause, God, only one thing emanates, 
while from His effect three things emanate—is applicable to Avicenna's 
theory no less than the theory he criticizes. What follows this, however, is a 
statement of the position of those who hold that God knows only Himself, fol­
lowed by al-Ghazali's criticism of it. 
Discussion 4 
1. There is an ambiguity in the argument which al-Ghazali attributes to 
the philosophers: the wording suggesting that in the argument the First Prin­
ciple could be the world. But the argument is a form of a reductio ad absur-
dum, the reasoning being something as follows: 
II an eternal world is affirmed as existing without a cause, then the principle 
of an existent without a cause would have been admitted. But this supposed exis­
tent without a cause—the world—entails multiplicity. Hence, it cannot be the 
first principle. Therefore, there must be another uncaused principle—namely, 
God, the First Principle—who is devoid of any multiplicity. 
2. That is, within the purview of what has been supposed by the philoso­
phers, as what follows shows. 
3. In other words, it would be God. The background to this formulation is 
Avicenna's proof from contingency for the existence of God. The pattern of the 
argument is well illustrated in the version in the Najdt which begins: 
There is no doubt that there is existence. Every existent is either necessary or 
possible. If necessary, then it would be true that the necessary exists, which is the 
thing being sought after. If possible, we will make it evident that the existence of 
the possible terminates with the necessary existent. (235) 
See M. E. Marmura, "Avicenna's Proof from Contingency for God's Existence 
in the Metaphysics of the Shifd1," Mediaval Studies 42 (1980): 337-52, where 
different versions of the proof are discussed and translated. The version in the 
Isharat, 447-55 (translated on pp. 351-52 of the article), seems to be the source 
of al-Ghazali's formulation. 
As punctuated in Dunya's edition, al-Ghazali's passage would translate as 
follows: 
The conclusive demonstration of the impossibility of infinite causes is to 
[ask]: In the case of each one of the individual causes, is it in itself possible or 
necessary? If necessary, why would it then need a cause? If possible, then the 
whole is characterized with possibility. Every possible needs a cause additional to 
itself. The whole, then, needs an extraneous cause. (143) 
4. The whole series of infinite causes would be necessary (not possible in 
this sense), but each individual component of the series would remain possible, 
requiring an individual cause. 

Page 491:
Nates to Discussion 5 235 
, Discussion 5 
1. See Avicenna, Najat, 229 ff. 
2. Wa laysa Zaydun insdnan li dhdtihi: The li dhdtihi is translatable as "in 
himself" or "through himself." Dhdt also translates as "essence," sometimes 
simply as "entity," or even as "being." Rigid adherence to one translation 
sometimes misses a nuance of meaning which this expression has in one con­
text but not another. I have adopted varying translations of the expression as 
dictated by context. 
3. The argument is Avicennan; see, for example, Avicenna's Metaphysics, 
8.5 (pp. 349-50). It also has a background in a logical problem which Avicenna 
tried to solve: that of predication. Animality as such—that is, considered sim­
ply as animality—is, he tells us, neither universal nor particular. For if it were 
universal—that is, if universal by its very essence (hence, by its very defini­
tion)—then there could be no such thing as a particular animal. If in its 
essence it were particular, then there could be only one animal: the individual 
animal with which animality is identified. Animality becomes a universal when 
universality attaches to it in the mind, rendering it predicable of many; ani­
mality becomes particular through its association with particular matter that 
individuates it. See Avicenna's Isagoge, 65; also M. E. Marmura, "Avicenna's 
Chapter on Universals in the Isagoge of His Shifd'," in Islam: Past Influence and 
Future Challenge, ed. A. T. Welch and P. Cachia (Edinburgh: Edinburgh Univer­
sity Press, 1979), 34-56; and M. E. Marmura, "Quiddity and Universality in 
Avicenna," in Neoplatonism and Islamic Thought, ed. Parviz Morewedge (Albany: 
State University of New York Press, 1992), 77-78. 
4. The reference here is to al-hadd al-shdrih, or lexical definition. 
5. cAld hiydliha: "Individually," "independently," "in itself." 
6. If this is a summary exposition of Avicenna's position, al-Ghazali is in 
effect interpreting him as holding that quiddity is prior to existence—a doubt­
ful interpretation. See note 7 below. 
7. This last point represents Avicenna's position quite accurately. But 
whether the statement that the quiddity is "prior" to existence is an accurate 
interpretation of Avicenna's position is a debatable point. See, for example, 
Avicenna's argument denying the priority of the quiddity to existence in Meta­
physics, 8.4 (pp. 346-47). The Avicennan distinction between essence and exis­
tence that underlies this discussion is sometimes expressed in the distinction 
between "affirmative existence" (al-wujud al-ithbati) and "special existence" or 
"proper existence," the esse priorium of the Latin scholastics, based on their 
translation of the Arabic, al-wujud al-khass. The example of the triangle's pos­
sessing this quiddity or proper existence is found in Avicenna's Metaphysics, 1.5 
(p. 31); see also Avicenna, Isagoge, 34. 
8. Another translation, "its meaning is known" (that is, "it does not require 
explanation"), is possible. The pattern of wording that follows, however, sug­
gests that this is the less likely translation. 
9. Literally, "and if not," where, in the sentence wa ilia fa laysa huwa 
kadhdlika, the ilia should probably be taken as in la (the translation I have 
adopted), the huwa as referring to God. The sentence is not without ambiguity. 

Page 492:
236 Notes to Discussion 6 
The ilia could be taken as "otherwise" (the meaning that first comes to mind) 
and the huwa as referring to the world, or the situation in general. Thus, a pos­
sible translation would be something as follows: "Otherwise, it is not the 
same," the "it" referring to the world. What immediately follows, however, 
suggests that the reference is to God. 
Discussion 6 
1. That what is intended here is a cause other than the Necessary Existent 
that is productive of the attributes becomes clear from al-Ghazali's response. 
Implicit here is also the idea that this is a cause which not only produces the 
attributes but relates them to the Necessary Existent on which they depend. 
2. More literally: "Hence, the regress of efficient causes of the attribute is 
cut with the essence, since it has no agent, just as the essence has no agent." 
3. Dhdt (see Discussion 5, note 4, above): To translate dhdt in this context 
as "essence," while certainly possible, should perhaps be avoided, since 
"essence" and "quiddity" can be interchangeable in their meaning. 
4. Mawsufa hi al-wujud: For Avicenna, God has no quiddity other than exis­
tence. Hence, the divine quiddity is not something other than existence to 
which existence is added, so to speak. 
Discussion 7 
1. Rasm: For example, "Man is a featherless biped," as distinct from the 
definition, "Man is a rational animal." 
2. Literally, "what is its positive." 
3. More literally, "in terms of what [thing]." 
4. Bihaythu yaqbal al-infisal: The reference is to tarkib, "composition." The 
reasoning here seems indirect. Al-Ghazali seems to be harking back to what he 
had stated earlier, to the effect that genera and differentia do not violate the 
unity of the essence and are, therefore, attributable to a first cause. To be a 
first cause does not exclude its being defined. 
5. The argument can perhaps be paraphrased as follows: A difference 
between the supposed two necessary existents is either a necessary condition 
for the necessary of existence or not. If it is a necessary condition, then the two 
cannot be different. If the difference is not a necessary condition, then it can 
be dispensed with. So the difference either does not exist or it can be dispensed 
with, the necessity of existence being accomplished without it. The supposed 
difference is irrelevant to the necessity of existence. Hence, the supposed two 
necessary existents cannot differ and consequently cannot be two, but must be 
one. 
6. Al-lawniyya: Literally, "color-ness." 
Discussion 8 
1. Fatakun al-mahiyya sababan li-al-wujud al-ladhi huwa tdbicun lahu, the lahu 
being in the masculine and, hence, not referring to the mdhiyya, which is feminine. 

Page 493:
Notes to Discussion 9 237 
2. That is, if they mean by "cause" a necessary but not a sufficient condition. 
3. That is, whatever is not additional to existence cannot be a quiddity. This 
harks back to Discussion 3, where al-Ghazali argues against the philosophers' 
insistence that the necessity of existence in the divine is identical with divine 
existence. Here he is refuting them in terms of their own assumption that 
necessity and existence in the divine are identical. The argument is ad hominem. 
Discussion 9 
1. La mujid laha: Literally, "that do not have that which brings about their 
existence." 
2. Discussion 1, First Proof, above. 
Discussion 10 
1. Hence, presumably, the parts must have a cause for both their existence 
and their combination in order to form a body. 
Discussion 11 
1. More literally, "As for Muslims, inasmuch as existence, according to 
them . ..." One notices here that al-Ghazali identifies Muslims with those who 
affirm the world's creation ex nihilo. 
2. Al-Ghazali here reaffirms his position that a pre-eternal world means 
the denial of the eternal will. An alternative possible translation would be: "As 
for you [philosophers], if you claim the world to be pre-eternal, then it is not 
originated through His will." This would be followed by the interrogative, 
"How, then,. . . ?" But if this is the intention, one would have expected the lam 
yahduth to read lamyakunyahduth. Moreover, one manuscript reads la.yahduth, 
which confirms the natural way of taking lam yahduth as a relative clause. 
3. See, for example, Avicenna's Commentary on the De Anima in Aristu cind 
al-carab, ed. A. A. Badawi (Cairo: n.p., 1947), 108. 
4. This, again, is the agreed-on division of knowledge into that which is a 
self-evident necessary truth and that which is known to be true through 
"reflection" or "theory," requiring a demonstrative proof to establish it. See 
Discussion 1, note 5, above. 
5. Istithnd* naqid al-muqaddam: In the evolution of the term istithna3 in the 
history of Arabic logic, "adding" is one meaning, although in its final form 
"repeating" would be the closest to its actual meaning. Translating the term as 
"repeating" works ideally in the modus ponens argument where, in the syllogism, 
"If A, then B; A, therefore B," A is "repeated." To translate the above literally, 
however, as "repeating the contradictory of the antecedent," would be ambigu­
ous, suggesting that the contradictory of the antecedent had already been 
given and is now repeated. To convey the correct meaning, one would have to 
give a paraphrase rather than a translation, such as "repeating the antecedent 
[but] in [its] contradictory [form]." For a valuable discussion of the term 
istithnd'1 in conditional syllogisms, see Kwame Gyekye, "The Term Istithna3 in 

Page 494:
238 Notes to Discussion 13 
Arabic Logic," Journal of the American Oriental Society 92, no. 1 Qanuary-March 
1972): 88-92. 
6. Bi al-ittifdq: Literally, "by agreement" in this context, "by coincidence" or 
"by chance" in other contexts. Avicenna uses it in the latter sense in his dis­
cussion of the conditional syllogism. The expression he uses is ittafaqa ittifdqan, 
which can be translated as "happening by coincidence." This is when the 
antecedent and the consequent both happen to be true with no immediate 
apparent necessary connection between them, as in the statement, "If man 
exists, then horse also exists." See Ibn Sina (Avicenna), Al-shifd7 (Healing): 
Al-qiyds (Syllogism), ed. S. Zayed (Cairo: [Wizarat al-Macarif], 1964), 1.1 (p. 
234). For a translation and commentary, see N. Shehaby, ThePropositionalLogic 
of Avicenna (Dordrecht, Neth.: Reidel, 1973), 37-38. 
Since both al-Ghazali and Avicenna are using similar expressions in their 
discussion of the conditional syllogism, it is tempting to interpret al-Ghazali as 
meaning by bi al-ittifdq the same as Avicenna means. This, however, does not 
seem to be the case. 
Discussion 13 
1. This means the celestial intellects as distinct from the celestial souls, the 
former in Avicenna's system sometimes being referred to as the cherubim and 
the latter as the active angels. 
2. Al-kull: "The whole." For al-Ghazali, this means knowledge that includes 
each existent in its particularity, not merely knowledge "of the whole" in a uni­
versal way. 
3. Jahtn, executed by the Umayyads in 749, shared with the Multazilites 
their doctrine of the created Qur^an but differed from them in his being a 
determinist; he was classified as a Murji^ite by al-Ashcari. He was noted for his 
doctrine that ultimately heaven and hell cease to exist, God alone being eternal. 
4. La yasir fd'ilan can be translated as "does not become an agent," but 
such a translation loses the force offd'ilan in this context. 
Discussion 14 
1. Qiyds al-'aql: Alternatively, "intellectual reasoning." 
Discussion 16 
1. Wa al-irada latba' al-murdd: The will follows the thing willed in the sense 
that, if the thing willed is particular, the will is particular, as indicated by the 
train of thought that follows. See Avicenna, Metaphysics, 9.2 (pp. 384 ff.). 
2. Tasawwur, in this instance, should not be translated as "conception," 
which is its usual meaning. 
3. Fa inna hull irdda min daruratihd tasawwur: Literally, "[In the case of] 
every will, it is necessary for it [to undergo] a tasawwur." It may not be illegiti­
mate in this instance to translate tasawwur also as "conception," since the 
apprehension is of a thing willed that is either a particular or a universal. 

Page 495:
Notes to Hart Twos Introduction 239 
4. More literally, "If we know the more frequent and the majority of them, 
there would be realized for us a clear opinion of the occurrence." 
5. See, for example, Avicenna, Ishardt, 218. 
6. This, in Avicenna's triadic emanative scheme, is the desire of the celes­
tial soul for the celestial intellect which moves the sphere. 
7. In other words, maintaining that the sphere requires particular repre­
sentations for its particular motions. 
8. The infinite cognitions would then coexist, "at one time," in the soul of 
a celestial sphere forming an actual infinite, which is impossible. 
9. Ddra: Literally, "rotates." 
10. Haqq al-nafs al-insdniyyafi jawharihd an tudrik aydanjamic al-ashya3: Lit­
erally, "It is the right of the human soul in its substance to apprehend also all 
things." Haqq also means "truth," and jawhar can mean "essence"—the mean­
ing that seems to fit the sense better. The doctrine that the soul in its natural 
state, unencumbered by bodily concerns, knows all things is Avicennan. See 
Discussion 11, note 3, above. 
Part Two: Introduction 
1. It is not certain whether this is a reference to Aristotle's Historia Ani­
malium, De Partibus Animalium, or De Generatione Animalium; to all three; or sim­
ply to Avicenna's Aristotelian Book of Animals, Kitdb al-Hayawan of the ShifdJ. 
2. This clearly suggests that al-Ghazali has the philosophers' theory of nec­
essary causal connection foremost in mind. As seen in Discussion 17, he begins 
by subjecting this theory to a severe criticism but then discusses an alternative 
theory that allows natural things to cause each other, while at the same time 
allowing the occurrence of miracles rejected by the philosophers. The state­
ment above supports the view that the second theory he introduces is 
presented simply for the sake of argument. Conclusive support for the view 
that this is the case is found in the Iqtisdd. See M. E. Marmura, "Al-Ghazali 
on Bodily Resurrection and Causality in the Tahdfut and the Iqtisdd," Aligarh 
Journal of Islamic Thought 2 (1989): 46-75, esp. 59 ff. See also the introduction 
to the translation. 
3. Reading cald ibtdl, the reading adopted by Bouyges. One manuscript 
reads bi-ibtdl, giving the sentence a different (but possible) meaning that 
would translate something as follows: "They interpreted [metaphorically] the 
staff devouring the magic of the magicians, [thereby] negating the divine 
proof manifest at the hand of Moses—[this] being the doubts of those who 
deny." In support of this second meaning is al-Ghazali's insistence that the 
miracle is created on behalf of the prophet as a proof for the authenticity of his 
prophethood. There is, however, a lack of clarity in the text. 
4. The term used isyatawdtar, the reference being to tawdtur, the innumer­
able corroborative individual reports of a historical event or a geographical place 
that yield knowledge that is certain. Tawdtur is included by the Islamic philoso­
phers and logicians as yielding premises usable in strict demonstrative proofs. 
5. See Avicenna, Ishardt, 218. 

Page 496:
240 Notes to Discussion 17 
6. Al-Ghazali is summarizing Avicenna in all this—Avicenna, Al-nafs, 5.6 
(pp. 219-20). Avicenna makes it plain that his proof is for the possibility of 
prophecy, not its necessity. The possibility of prophecy, however, is a premise 
he uses in the Metaphysics to prove the necessity of prophecy. 
Discussion 17 
1. The sentence starting from "where" in the translation is a relative 
clause, and so is the one that follows it. The issue here is not that two things 
are not identical. Avicenna, for example, is very specific in maintaining that 
cause and effect are two separate things. What is at stake is whether the con­
nection between them is necessary. 
2. Normally, there are relations existing between two separate things that 
entail each other—if A is to the left of B, then B is necessarily to the right of 
A, and so on. But this, according to al-Ghazali in this passage (and elsewhere 
as well), is not the case with causal relations. 
3. ''Ala al-tasawuq: "Side by side" or "one alongside the other," but not "one 
following the other" and not "in a successive order." What al-Ghazali is talking 
about is concomitance, where the priority is not temporal. His critique is of the 
Avicennan concept of essential cause, where cause and effect are simultaneous. 
4. Al-Ghazali discusses two positions. 
5. Macani: Literally, "meanings," "ideas." 
6. Wa al-kalam macahum: What al-Ghazali means by this sentence is not 
entirely clear. Our understanding of the sentence would be consistent with 
what was stated earlier: that "there is no disagreement [with the philosophers] 
that the infusions of spirit . . . ; that the father does not produce his son . . ." 
One manuscript reads fa la kalam ma1 ahum: "There is no dispute with them 
[on this issue]." This indicates that kalam ma'ahum means "dispute with them" 
(though not on this issue.) Hence, an alternative translation would be "the dis­
pute being with them." 
7. Baynahd: It is not clear whether this contact is between the principles 
and observable things or between observable terrestrial bodies. If one follows 
al-Ghazali's analogy of light being the cause of seeing that takes place when the 
eye is opened, it would seem that the contact here is between some terrestrial 
things and the principle, at which point an event would emanate. Alterna­
tively, what is intended is the contact between two terrestrial bodies—for 
example, fire and cotton, with the enactment of burning the cotton emanating 
from the celestial principle. That this is what al-Ghazali probably intends is 
strongly suggested by what follows. 
8. Wahib al-suwar: Identified with the celestial principles, usually the active 
intellect. See Avicenna, Metaphysics, 9.5 (pp. 411, 413), where the giver of forms 
bestows forms on matter, beginning with the four elements. Avicenna's discus­
sion in his Metaphysics, however, pertains to ontology, not epistemology. Though 
it is true that, in Avicenna's epistemology, the human rational soul receives 
forms from the active intellect, these are the intelligibles, not the particulars 
perceived by the senses. These latter are caused by the particulars of sense. If 
al-Ghazali's statement above is intended as referring to an Avicennan causal 

Page 497:
Notes to Discussion 17 241 
theory, this would not be accurate. If al-Ghazali did not have Avicenna in mind, 
where did he get this idea? Were there philosophers advocating such a view, 
which would be quite close to occasionalism? Averroes does not shed much 
light on this question. 
9. The word here, tashnic, is a key term. It must be stressed that this is the 
masdar of the verb in its second form. This is not shandca, "repugnancy," but 
tashnic, "vilification." A misreading of this term as shanaca gives an erroneous 
interpretation of what al-Ghazali is saying. 
10. Again, the term here is tashnicdt, the feminine plural of tashni'. It is not 
shandcdt, "repugnancies," but tashnicdt, "acts of vilification." 
11. An nusallim: "That we admit." In Avicenna's logic, the admitted premises 
(al-musallamdt) are those conceded, not necessarily because they are true, but 
for the sake of argument in dialectical discourse. See al-Ghazali's Fourth Intro­
duction and note 3, Author's Introduction, above. 
12. Literally, "Our statement in this is as your statement in that." 
13. That the miracle is enacted by God on behalf of the prophet is an 
Ashcarite position. See, for example, aljuwayni, Al-irshdd, ed. M. Y. Musa and 
A. A. Abd al-Hamid (Cairo: n.p., 1950), 308-9; also al-Ghazali's Al-iqtisdd, 
195-96. It is not entirely clear, however, why al-Ghazali thinks it is also more 
befitting of the philosophers, unless he means that all events in this terrestrial 
world are caused by "the giver of forms," as he interprets the philosophers to say. 
14. Ni^am al-khayr: The terminology is Avicennan, and al-Ghazali follows 
Avicenna closely in maintaining that the prophet is needed for bringing about 
the good order. Avicenna, however, speaks of the "necessity" of prophethood, 
a term which al-Ghazali avoids. See Avicenna's Metaphysics, 10.2 (pp. 441-43). 
In this discussion al-Ghazali attempts as much as possible to speak in the 
language of the philosophers so as to show that, even in terms of some of their 
own principles, those miracles they reject can be upheld. In the Iqtisdd, he 
makes his position clear: the existence of the prophet is possible, not necessary. 
Iqtisdd, 195 ff. 
15. In the Iqtisdd, al-Ghazali makes it clear that it is God, not the prophet, 
who renders something preponderant. Iqtisdd, 194. 
16. This is dictated by the sense. The text here reads simply "and." 
17. The unvoweled term given is qdra, which is easily read as qudra, "power." 
This, however, would not make good sense, as will be seen in what follows in 
the argument. The most likely reading is qidra, "cooking pot." The normal 
term for this is qidr, without the feminine ending, but qidra is a variant (see 
Dozy). The principal Cairo edition has kudra, "smudge" (the reading adopted 
by Dunya), which would also make sense. All the other sources in Bouyges's 
edition, however, have it as qdra. 
18. As al-Ghazali explains in the Iqtisdd (90 ff.), the power in us is created 
by God with His creation of the movement. Human power and the movement 
are concomitants. There is no causal efficacy between human power and the 
movement. Both are the simultaneous creations of the divine power. This, 
however, enables us to experience the distinction between the tremor and the 
"voluntary" movement. We experience the latter as though enacted by us, 
when in fact it is not. This discussion goes back to al-Ashcari. Al-Ashcari, Kitdb 

Page 498:
242 Notes to Discussion 18 
al-lumac, ed. R.J. McCarthy (Beirut: Imprimerie Catholique, 1953), 41-42. 
See also M. E. Marmura, "Ghazali's Chapter on Divine Power in the Iqtisdd," 
Arabic Science and Philosophy 4, no. 2 (September 1994): 279-315. 
Discussion 18 
1. Wa lakinfihi: Literally, either "there is in it," where the reference would 
be to the common sense, or "there is in him," where the reference would be to 
the individual person. In the following sentence there appears the term cindahu, 
"with him," indicating that the use of fihi in the previous phrase refers not to 
the person but to the faculty, the common sense. 
2. This is the faculty which Avicenna discusses and which is not encoun­
tered in earlier Arabic philosophical writings. 
3. Qaddyd: Strictly "propositions" or "judgments," as distinct from concepts. 
In the above, however, this is a loose way of saying things and is not intended 
to be taken strictly. I have translated the term as it appears in the text. 
4. This statement is quite significant in understanding al-Ghazali's attitude 
toward the philosophical system of the Islamic philosophers, notably that of 
Avicenna. What Avicenna formulates within his system based on the theory 
of necessitating causes and necessitated effects can be formulated in terms of 
what God decrees as a habitual order divested of this causal necessity. This 
must always be kept in mind when, in later writings, al-Ghazali seems to be 
adopting Avicennan cosmological ideas; and it must be taken fully into account 
when interpreting him either as being inconsistent or as having changed his 
mind about his attitude toward the philosophers. It should also be borne in mind 
that the charge that the Islamic philosophers are infidels, which he levels at 
them in the Tahafut and the Iqtisdd, is repeated in works written after the Ihyd', 
in his Faysal al-tafriqa, and in his autobiographical Al-munqidh min al-daldl. 
5. The argument occurs in Avicenna's Al-nafs, 5.2 (pp. 187 ff.). 
6. The term here is istithnd'\ the act of repetition, "a second time"—refer­
ring to either the antecedent, the consequent, or the negation of either. In this 
ease, the repeated premise is the consequent, resulting in the negation of the 
antecedent as the conclusion. The argument is a modus tollens: if p, then q; 
not q, therefore not p. 
7. Bi al-ittifdq: See Discussion 11, note 6. What may be intended here is the 
agreement between the negation of the consequent and the negative conclu­
sion, which is the negation of the antecedent, rather than a reference to some­
thing on which logicians agree. 
8. See Avicenna, Al-shifd1 (Healing): Al-tabiciyydt (Physics), ed. S. Zayed 
(Cairo: [Wizarat al-Macarif], 1983), 3.4 (pp. 188-97). 
9. The point of the argument is that the material soul that is receptive of 
sensible things cannot be the one receptive of the abstract forms. For, even if 
we do not maintain that it would then be "imprinted" in the material recepta­
cle, it would still be related to it in a manner which would render such abstract 
knowledge divisible, which is an impossibility. The material receptacle receives 
only the sensible representations, as the concluding statement of this argu­
ment asserts. 

Page 499:
Notes to Discussion 19 243 
10. Like any other material thing, a material receptacle is, according to the 
Aristotelians, infinitely divisible in potency; but, according to the above argu­
ment, if each of its parts is related to knowledge, then, when something is 
known, all these parts will have knowledge, forming an infinite which is actual. 
But the actual infinite, for the philosophers, is impossible. Hence, on this sup­
position, the recipient of this knowledge cannot be material. 
11. Al-juz'1 al-fard: Literally, "the individual part." 
12. Avicenna, Al-nafs, 5.2 (pp. 192 ft".). 
13. That is, whether brain or heart. 
14. This is the Avicennan view that awareness of oneself is constant and 
the most primary knowledge. 
The human soul is [so constituted that] it is, by its very nature, aware of 
existents. It is aware of some naturally; with others, it gains power to become 
aware of them by acquisition. That which is realized for it naturally is always 
actual. Thus, its awareness of itself is by nature, this being a constituent of it 
and, hence, belonging to it always and in actuality. Its awareness that it is aware 
, of itself, however, is through acquisition. (Ibn Sina [Avicenna], Al-tacliqdt, ed. 
• A. R. Badawi [Cairo: n.p., 1973], 30) 
15. See Avicenna's Al-nafs, 5.7 (p. 224). 
16. Ibid., 5.2 (pp. 194 ff.). 
17. Tuca(til, the subject being kullu hddhihi al-ashyd3 al-ukhar. 
18. We find in Avicenna two versions of this argument. The first is in Al-
mubdhathat in Aristu cindal-carab, ed. A. A. Badawi (Cairo: n.p., 1947), 128-29; 
the second is in Risdla fi ma'rifat al-nafs al-ndtiqa wa ahwalihd, in Avicenna, 
Ahwal, 183-84. 
19. Literally, "then no." 
20. The example differs from the example of Hobbes's ship of Theseus, in 
which all the parts are replaced and the question is then asked as to whether the 
ship is the same as the original ship. See Thomas Hobbes, The English Works ..., 
ed. W. Molesworth (London: J. Bohn, 1839-45), 1:136-38. 
21. cInda mushdhadat al-hiss li shakhs mu'ayyan: Literally, "at the sense's per­
ception of a specific individual." 
22. In other words, the form is the physical image separated from what is 
accidental and stands in a representative capacity to the individual instances 
of the kind. This is a reformulation of Avicenna's view in Al-nafs, 5.5 
(pp. 209-10). For Avicenna, it is not the image but that abstract form which 
has this representative capacity. 
23. Literally, "without." 
Discussion 19 
1. See Discussion 2. 
2. That is, the preceding one. 
3. This is Avicenna's theory, that human souls are individuated not only by 
the bodies with which they are created but also by their encounter with man­
aging the body. 

Page 500:
244 Notes to Discussion 20 
4. Bi hukm hddha al-burhdn: "By virtue of this demonstration." This is not to 
be understood as al-Ghazah's acceptance of the demonstration (which assumes 
the immateriality of the soul) as sound, but, rather, as granting its soundness 
for the sake of argument, whereby he would show that on the philosophers' 
own grounds the immortality of the soul does not necessarily follow. 
5. See Ibn Sina (Avicenna), Risalahfi ithbat al-nubuwwat, ed. M. E. Mar-
mura, 2d impression (Beirut: Dar al-Nahar, 1991), 56-58. 
6. Discussion 2. 
7. Discussion 1, Fourth Proof. 
8. The reference is to the would-be existent when it comes into existence, 
as the discussion that follows shows. Linguistically, it could refer to the "bearer 
of potentiality" as not itself being the potentiality for existence. 
Discussion 20 
1. Dhaivq: Literally, "taste," a term that acquired the meaning of "direct 
experience" and has also become a technical term in Islamic mystical thought. 
2. One notes here that the Aristotelian doctrine of the mean is attributed 
to the teaching of the religious law. This is implicit in al-Farabi and Avicenna, 
who hold that law is a copy, "the imitation" of philosophy. The doctrine of the 
mean is discussed in Avicenna, Metaphysics, 10.5 (pp. 454-55). 
3. Tahdhib al-akhlaq: The use of this expression suggests al-Ghazali's 
acquaintance with Miskawayh's ethical treatise bearing this expression as 
its title. 
4. See Avicenna, Risalah fi ithbat al-nubuwwdt, 55. 
5. Wa qawluhu, reading the wa as a wdw of circumstance; thus, literally, 
"when [there isj His statement . . ." 
6. For this Avicennan argument, see Metaphysics, 1.5 (p. 36). 
7. This doctrine is associated with the Muctazilite al-Shahham (d. ca. 845) 
8. See Avicenna, Risdla adhawiyya fi amr al-macdd, ed. S. Dunya (Cairo: 
n.p., 1949), 81; see also M. E. Marmura, "Avicenna and the Problem of the 
Infinite Number of Souls," Medieval Studies 22 (1960): 232-39. 
9. Ibid. 
10. See Avicenna, Al-nafs, 5.4 (p. 207). 
11. Al-ikhtirac. 
Conclusion 
1. Al-Ghazali did address himself to this topic in his later work Faysal 
al-tqfriqa. 

Page 501: [No Text Extracted]

Page 502: [No Text Extracted]

Page 503: [No Text Extracted]

Page 504: [No Text Extracted]

Page 505:
Index 
Abraham, 169 
absolute, 40, 97, 136, 138-39, 184, 198, 
216 
abstractions, 181, 231, 242, 243 
Abu al-Hudhayl al-<Allaf, 48 
accident, accidents, 11, 28, 40, 48, 51-54, 
66, 89, 108-9, 111, 123-24, 135-36, 
139, 168, 175-76, 185, 196, 202, 213, 
215, 232, 243 
accidental, 99-100, 198, 213 
active intellect. See intellect, active 
actual, 150, 154, 207 
actual infinite, 243 
actuality, 82, 87-88, 90, 142, 147, 150, 
186, 206-7, 243 
ad infinitum, 27-28, 30, 37, 40, 79, 81, 
105, 197. See also infinite 
afterlife, 224. See also hereafter 
agent, 45-46, 50, 53, 55-64, 78, 89, 
91-92, 98, 100, 114, 116, 120, 127-28, 
167-69, 176, 236, 238 
aggregate, 19, 112, 124, 199 
alchemy, 163 
cAmr, and Zayd, 20, 84, 89, 136, 202-5 
angels, 64, 67, 76, 83, 94-95, 107, 115, 
126, 135, 149-50, 153, 167-68, 
171-73, 178,181,210-11,238 
animals, 11, 30, 44, 56-57, 66-67, 87-88, 
110, 113, 127-28, 136, 139, 144-46, 
148-49, 154, 162, 165, 167, 170, 
172-73, 176, 178-81, 191, 195, 198, 
200, 210, 218, 221, 231, 235, 236 
animate, 110, 144, 175, 189, 216 
annihilate, annihilation, xix, 11, 47-54, 
83, 123, 163, 165, 198, 201-2, 205-7, 
215, 225, 234 
anthropomorphic, 214-15 apogee, 24, 28 
apostle, 71, 106, 210 
appendages, 136 
appetitive faculty, appetitive power, 64, 
92, 180, 209 
apprehender. See intellectual 
apprehender 
apprehension, 69-72, 75, 90, 93-95, 126, 
137, 142, 154, 164, 168, 175, 183-84, 
186-88, 190-93, 195, 232, 238 
Arabs, 58, 214 
Argumentation, Book of, 9 
Aristotle, Aristotelian, xix, xx, xxiv-
xxv, 2, 4, 19, 83, 242-43, 244, 246 
arithmetic. See mathematics 
al-Ashcari, Ashcarites, xvi, xix, xxiii-
xxv, 51-52, 230, 231, 232, 238, 241 
astral, 28, 150, 162. See also stars 
astronomical, 7, 48, 49, 166, 233. See 
also stars 
atheism, 7, 124, 222-23 
atom, 103, 134, 183, 187, 234 
Averroes (Ibn Rushd), xvi, xxiii, 240 
Avicenna (Ibn Sina), xvi, xvii, xix-xxi, 
xxv, 4, 19, 42, 70, 83, 101, 103-4, 107, 
125-30, 134-35, 202, 229, 230-31, 
232, 233, 234, 235, 236, 237, 238, 239, 
240, 241, 242, 243-44 
Baghdad, xvii, 187-88 
beasts, 75, 107, 169, 183, 187, 189, 
201, 210 
bestower of forms, 168. See also wahib 
al-suwar 
blackness, and whiteness, 21, 38, 
41-42, 44-45, 51, 53-54, 108, 139, 
175, 188, 198 
-249-

Page 506:
250 Index 
blind, 3, 132, 167 
blood, 172, 176, 199, 217, 221 
bones, 171, 218, 221-23 
bowels, 58, 166 
brain, 153, 178-79, 188, 191-92, 195, 
201, 243 
burn, 58, 155, 166-69, 171-72, 243 
cannibalism, 217 
Categories, The, 9 
cause, causes, xvi, xx, xxiv, 12, 15-17, 
23-24, 26-30, 36, 38, 44, 47, 49, 
56-59, 63-66, 70-75, 78-79, 81-82, 
84-86, 88-92, 94, 97-99, 101, 103, 
107, 110-14, 116-18, 121, 123-24, 
128-29, 132, 142, 146, 155-56, 
158-59, 163, 165, 166-69, 188, 191, 
194, 196, 205, 213, 220-26, 233, 234, 
236, 237, 239, 240, 241, 242 
celestial 
body, 74, 120-21, 157 
intellect, 115, 153,233,238,239 
motion, 66, 82-83, 151-52, 155, 157, 219 
souls, 74, 153, 155-56, 160, 238 
sphere, 75-77, 120,158,231,239 
See also heaven, heavens 
cherubim, 153, 238 
Christians, 2, 230 
circular motion, circular movement, 18, 
27-30, 66, 82-83, 123-24, 135, 141, 
144, 146-47, 150, 154, 157, 219, 231 
co-eternal, 98 
coexistence, 12, 30, 45, 47, 62-64, 80, 
232, 239 
cogitative sense, 179 
cognitions, 20, 44, 104-5, 135, 139-41, 
159, 171, 177, 182-83, 195, 196, 
206, 239 
Cognitions of the Intellects, The, 9 
commonality, 2, 208, 214 
composite, 65-66, 68, 79, 87, 100, 112, 
119-20 
compulsion, 128, 141, 143, 145 
compulsory movement, 55, 145-46 
concavity, 66, 179 
conception, 27, 92, 111,238 
concomitants, 29, 33, 48, 61, 63, 68, 72, 
74, 89, 99-100, 110-11, 115, 116, 118, 
136, 161, 163, 198, 204, 240, 241 
concrete existence, 44, 73, 82, 88 
concupiscent, 180 , , 
condense, 52 conditional syllogism, 48, 126, 238. See 
also syllogism 
connection, 17, 61, 80, 108, 147, 163, 166, 
202, 212, 222, 226 
connotations, 100 
contingent, 69, 124. See also possibility 
continuity, 87, 193 
contraries, 22, 27, 188, 202, 206 
cooking pot, 176, 241 
copulation, 95, 165, 210. See also sexual 
intercourse 
corporeality, 75, 147, 198, 200, 218 
corruption, 4, 29, 47-49, 67, 161-62, 201, 
204-5, 218. See also generation 
Creator, 5, 7, 12, 21, 31, 37, 59, 61, 87-88, 
89, 91, 93, 120, 145, 167, 169, 200, 215. 
See also God, as creator 
creatures, 129, 149, 154, 159, 170, 214 
cubit, 37-38, 231 
custom, customary, 5, 15, 173 
cyclical, 223-24 
death, 58, 80, 211-13, 217 
decapitation, 166 
decompose, 220 
definition, 87, 101, 110-12, 174 
delay, 15-16, 17, 96, 206 
demonstrative, 17, 80, 202, 239 
denuded, 115, 198,206 
description, 13, 19, 22, 28-29, 41-43, 48, 
50,56,61,85,90,96, 111, 119, 126, 
137, 198, 205, 208 
desire, 157, 165, 180, 189, 203-4, 209, 211, 
239 
destruction, 46, 71, 106, 180, 217 
devils, 3, 83 
dialectics, 175, 241 
differentiation, 22, 27, 111-12, 121 
dimension, 33, 38 
disbelievers, 2, 35, 173. See also 
unbelievers 
discipline, 5, 9, 181, 213 
disjunction, 85, 205 
disruption, 11, 171, 190,225 
dissection, 192 
dissolution, 197 
divinity, 7, 13, 94, 100, 104, 106, 108, 115, 
129, 141, 211-12, 230. See also God 
divisibility, 10, 19, 52, 58, 65, 69, 85-88, 
92,95,97, 110,113,117,119,134, 
136-37, 145, 157, 161, 182-88, 188, 
197, 199-200, 202, 224-25, 242 

Page 507:
Index 251 
divisions, 18, 66, 78, 95, 130, 140,161, 
178, 180, 191,202,218,223 
divorce, 15-16 
dog, 170 
donkey, 95 
dreams, 162 
interpretation of, 156 
drunkenness, 209 
dryness, 62, 167, 179, 233 
duration, 20, 31, 48 
ear, 1, 188, 193, 211, 217 
earth, 6, 25, 28-29, 34, 49, 56, 71, 82, 92, 
103, 134, 146, 150, 154, 158, 162, 165, 
172-73, 176, 215, 216-18, 221-23 
east, 18, 26-27, 151-52, 161 
eat, eating, 95, 155, 166, 172, 210, 217-18 
eclipse, 6-7, 25, 134-38 
effect, 12, 15-17, 30, 47, 51, 56-57, 62-75, 
77, 80-81, 84, 90-91, 97-104, 107, 110, 
115, 116, 118, 121, 124, 129, 131-32, 
140-42, 155, 159, 162-63, 165, 169, 
183, 194, 212, 224-25 
elements, 29, 49, 52, 82, 113, 123, 161-62, 
172, 205, 207, 218, 220-21 
elliptical, 24 
emanate, emanation, 67, 70, 91-93, 121, 
128, 141, 150, 152-53, 168, 172-73 
enact, 39, 41, 50-51, 55-61, 63-65, 76, 
91, 94, 99, 117, 127-28, 162, 167-68, 
170, 175-76, 180, 222, 224 
endurance, 19, 31, 47, 51-52, 61-62, 83, 
172, 179, 183, 205, 208, 216, 232 
enemies, 169,210-11 
enjoyment, 89, 94-95, 209 
enmity, 179, 183-87 
entity, 19, 41-43, 45, 86, 93, 118, 186, 
220, 218, 235 
equality, 20-21, 23, 25-26, 37, 39, 91, 
106,110-11,121, 195,206,214,231 
equator, 24 
essence, xv, 10, 12, 17, 22-23, 30-32, 37, 
45, 51, 62-63, 65, 68-70, 72, 77, 81, 
84-93, 95-102, 104-6, 108-11, 113, 
115, 118, 121, 128, 130-33, 137-38, 
140-42, 145, 159, 169, 186, 195, 202, 
206, 230, 235, 236, 239 
estimation, estimative faculty, 23, 31—33, 
35-39, 82-83, 86-88, 101-3, 108, 147, 
157, 179-80, 183-84, 186, 232 
eternal, 7, 12-14, 18, 21-22, 27-31, 36, 
39-41, 43, 47-48, 50-51, 54, 55, 62-63, 76, 79, 82, 98-99, 101, 114, 
119-20, 123-24, 125, 139-42, 150, 
155, 163, 208, 223, 225 
eternal knowledge. See knowledge, 
eternal 
eternal recurrence, 225 
eternal will, 15-17, 19-21, 55, 121-22, 
147, 224-25 
ethics, 213 
even, 18-19 
event, 15, 55, 80, 150-52, 155, 159, 164, 
168, 171, 177, 191, 222, 231, 239, 240, 
241. See also temporal event 
everlasting, 29, 47-48, 61, 76, 89, 90, 
205, 208 
evil, 3, 71, 93-95 
ewe, 179, 183-84, 186-87, 231 
exegesis, 4 
existent, xv, xvi, 10, 17, 19, 21, 28, 40-43, 
48, 50-51, 53, 56, 59-67, 69-74, 76, 
78-101, 110-14, 117-20, 124-26, 
131-32, 134, 142, 154, 200, 206, 210, 
216, 226, 233, 234, 236, 238, 243, 244 
extension, 33 
eye, 1, 54, 58, 135, 142, 167-68, 178, 188, 
190, 206-7, 210-11, 214, 223, 240 
face, 1, 8, 46, 65, 169 
faculties, 24, 38, 71, 77, 93, 142, 153-54, 
156-57, 162, 164-65, 178-81, 183-84, 
186, 189, 193-96, 198-99, 201, 209, 
230-31, 240. See also estimation, 
estimative faculty 
famine, 217 
al-Farabi, xix-xx, 4, 83 
father, 2, 104-5, 167, 243 
fear, 94-95, 195, 209 
feel, 160, 209-10, 212, 222 
fetus, 221 
figurative, 57, 78 
figure, 26, 75, 88, 106, 111, 142, 182 
fire, 52, 56, 58-59, 91, 128, 131, 155, 164, 
166-69, 171-72, 208-9, 214, 225, 240 
firmament, 28 
First, the, 10, 70-72, 75, 90-92, 94-95, 
96, 99-105, 108-9, 110, 112, 114-15, 
116, 118, 119-20, 122, 125-28, 131-33, 
142, 160, 167, 203 
Cause, 74, 155 
Existent, 120, 124 
Principle, 64-65, 67-73, 76, 78-79, 82, 
87-90, 96, 150, 233, 234 

Page 508:
252 Index 
flesh, 171, 217-18, 221-23 
food, 197, 209-10, 216, 221 
foot, 34, 58, 155, 158, 188, 193 
form, 9, 26, 28, 40, 44, 48, 52-54, 65-66, 
72, 75, 79, 82, 87-89, 92-94, 119, 
123-24, 126, 131, 142, 145, 150, 153, 
158, 164, 168, 171, 173-76, 179-80, 
183, 186-87, 189, 192, 197, 199-200, 
202, 206, 209, 215, 217, 220, 223, 231, 
234,240,241,242,243 
friend, 4, 6 
fruits, 170, 180, 218 
fundament, 206 
furnace, 171 
Galen, 12, 44, 48-49 
genera, 44, 101, 105, 125, 139, 140, 173, 
175-76,238 
generation, 12, 29, 67, 74, 125, 129, 152, 
161,165, 173,217-18,223-24,226. 
See also corruption 
generosity, 89, 93, 172, 212, 216 
genus, 10,56,88, 104, 110-15, 198-99, 
220, 224 
geometry, geometrical, 2, 6, 8, 11, 107, 
183,187 
al-Ghazali, Abu Hamid Muhammad ibn 
Muhummad al-Tusi, xv-xxvii 
globe, 34 
God, xv, xvi, xix, xx-xxi, xxii, xxiv, 1, 3, 
6, 11-12, 14, 20, 23, 25, 30-32, 35, 
46-47,63,65,70, 119, 144-45, 
149-52, 181, 210-11, 213-14, 219, 223, 
225-27. See also divinity 
act of, 7, 39, 59-61, 63-64, 91, 128, 
173, 176 
attributes of, 5, 10, 23, 52, 93-94, 96, 
106, 109, 117, 125, 133, 149, 214-15, 226 
change in, 138-40, 142, 224 
as creator, 10, 14, 30, 36-38, 51-52, 
55, 146, 170-71, 176-77, 216. See 
also Creator 
essence of, 77, 90, 106, 129 
knowledge of, 18, 23, 45, 91-92, 94, 
101-5, 107-8, 125, 128-39, 143, 159, 
171,211,220,226 
messengers of, 3, 5-6, 210, 214. See 
also Muhammad 
partner to, 45 
power of, 37-40, 51, 71, 143-44, 
165-66, 169-72, 174-75, 181, 204, 
215, 217, 219, 222, 224, 241 unity of, 45, 65, 70, 76, 79, 84, 87-88, 
101, 108, 115, 118, 135,226 
way of, 2, 223-24 
will of, 22, 53, 59, 76, 128-29, 223-25 
grammar, 8, 211. See also linguistics 
habit, habitual, 11, 16, 23, 163, 166, 
170-72, 176-77, 181, 190, 191, 196, 
222, 225, 242 
haccceity, 193 
hair, 51, 53, 76, 196 
hand, 23, 30-31, 58, 62-63, 92, 163, 174, 
176, 187-88, 199-200, 214 
harmony, 179, 224 
head, 34, 51, 58, 135, 179, 192-93, 196 
hearing, 1, 2, 9, 130, 132, 167, 187, 190, 
192-95,211 
heart, 1, 58, 171, 191-93, 197, 211, 217, 
243 
heathen, 137 
heating, 56, 75, 91, 128, 176 
heaven, heavens, 7-8, 11, 18, 25-26, 
28-30, 34, 36-37, 65-67, 71-74, 79, 
89, 92, 103, 111, 113, 121, 123, 134-35, 
144-50, 152-54, 157, 159, 161 
animal, 11, 30, 144-46, 148, 154, 231 
heavenly 
angels, 150, 153 
bodies, 145-47, 173 
kingdom, 152 
movement, 19, 29, 34, 48, 135, 145-46, 
157-59, 161 
spheres, 25 
hereafter, 2, 203, 208, 213, 215, 222. See 
also afterlife 
heretical, xv, 2, 226 
hexagon, 7, 9, 26, 28 
Hippocrates, 2 
homogeneous, 76, 136 
horoscope, 173 
horse, 19, 127, 170, 173, 179, 188, 197, 199, 
216-17, 240 
houris, 208 
house, 8-9, 16, 151, 157, 170, 175, 192 
human, xxi, 16, 57, 68, 75-76, 84, 94, 
102, 108, 110, 126-28, 130, 136, 149, 
151, 157-58, 160, 170, 172-73, 179, 
187-88, 192, 196-99, 204, 215-18, 
221-23, 239 
faculties, 24, 71, 77, 153, 178, 181 
knowledge, mind, xxiv, 12, 23, 101-2, 
106, 108, 155, 170 

Page 509:
Index 253 
human (continued) 
soul, xx, xxiv, xxv—xxvi, 11, 19, 42, 52, 
74, 80, 82-83, 123, 159, 162-63, 178, 
180, 182, 201, 218, 239, 243 
humanity, xxiv, xxv, 84, 88, 89, 113, 214 
humors, 44, 54, 158,218,221 
hunger, 159, 210 
hyle, 52, 88 
hypothesis, hypothetical, hypothesize, 
35-38, 39, 48, 50, 82-83, 86, 88, 108, 
146, 148, 182, 183, 191, 194, 196, 225, 
232, 233 
Ibn Rushd. See Averroes 
Ibn Sina. See Avicenna 
idea, 26, 72-73, 94, 189, 231, 233, 236, 240 
identical, 15, 20, 48, 51, 54, 68-70, 72, 
93, 95, 101-3, 108, 128, 138-39, 183, 
207, 215-16, 230, 233, 237, 240 
idiom, 9, 16, 98, 104, 135 
ignorance, 6, 106-7, 132, 135, 137, 158, 
163, 188-89, 209 
Ihya' culum al-din (The revivification of 
the sciences of religion), xviii-xix, 
xxiii, 232, 242 
illumination, 56, 156, 169 
image, 54, 142, 153, 156, 162, 243 
imaginary, 1-3, 13-14, 17, 33, 36, 38, 61, 
74, 100-1, 104, 151-52, 156, 158, 160, 
162, 164-65, 178-80, 193, 195, 197, 
199-201, 210, 214, 223 
imitate, 2, 3, 8, 71, 135, 152, 156, 213 
impediment, 16, 126-27, 160, 194, 201, 209 
imperfect, 94-95, 208-9, 217 
impossibility, 10, 13, 15, 17-18, 21, 24, 36, 
39-40, 42-45, 47, 49-50, 52, 64, 76, 
81, 94, 96-97, 100, 112, 117, 120, 141, 
144, 154, 159-60, 174, 177, 204, 207, 
214-15, 217, 219 
impotence, 13, 36-37, 39, 95, 106, 125, 210 
imprint, 42, 44-46, 54, 67, 126, 142, 
163-65, 168, 178, 180, 183-86, 189, 
191, 199, 201, 203, 211, 242 
inanimate, 56, 57, 139, 142, 147, 167, 175 
inclination, 24, 28, 52, 56, 165, 189, 203, 
211 
incoherence, 3, 7, 106, 184 
inconsistency, 10, 184, 242 
indivisible, 182-84, 187 
inductive, 174, 191-92 
indwell, 50, 66, 182-83, 187, 192, 195, 
198-99, 202 infant, 196, 221 
infidels, infidelity, 226, 242 
infinite, 18-20, 25, 33, 48, 79-83, 101, 
103-5, 139, 141, 153-54, 159, 182, 186, 
218-19, 223, 234, 239, 243. See also 
ad infinitum 
regress, 14, 16, 30, 50, 52, 79, 117, 147 
time, 31 
infusion, 93, 167 
inhere, 12, 43, 48, 51, 66, 86, 90, 100, 154, 
158, 199, 201 
innate, 137, 156, 203-4 
insanity, 55, 158 
inspiration, 144, 152, 156 
instrument, 9, 11, 14, 56-57, 65, 93, 204, 
211,219,230 
intellect, 68, 70, 73, 75, 89-90, 108, 115, 
129, 132, 136, 159, 180, 193-95, 
198-200 
active, 67, 233, 240 
celestial, 153, 233, 238 
first, 64, 67, 69-70, 90, 115, 129 
pure, 64, 66, 95, 126, 135, 153 
intellectual apprehender, intellectual 
apprehension, 18, 54, 67-72, 75, 
78, 89-90, 95, 108, 115, 126-27, 190, 
192, 198 
intent, intention, 16, 17, 91, 102-3, 
149-50, 163 
intercourse. See sexual intercourse 
intermediaries, 64, 74, 76, 120, 132, 142, 
155, 159, 210 
internal, 136, 158, 178, 180 
interpretation. See dreams, interpreta­
tion of; metaphor, interpretation of 
intuition, 155, 164, 171 
invent, 30, 92, 112,219,231 
Iqtisddfi al-ictiqdd, al- (Moderation in 
belief), xviii, xxiii-xxiv, xxv, 232, 241 
Isagoge, 9, 230, 237 
Islam, Islamic, 1, 2, 4, 136, 175, 208, 226, 
239, 240, 242, 244 
Jahm, 140, 240. See also Muctazila 
Jesus, 31 
Jews, 2, 229 
judgment 
day of, 1, 226 
intellectual, 42, 43-44, 45, 51, 106, 178, 
198 
universal, 191 
Jupiter, 18, 67 

Page 510:
254 Index 
kaldm, xv-xvii, 23, 230, 231 
Karramiyya, 8, 51, 140 
kill, 58-59, 169, 211, 219, 226 
kingdom, 152, 212 
knower, 55, 63, 91, 93, 101, 105-6, 109, 
132,135,137-40, 176, 185-88, 213, 233 
knowledge 
eternal, 18, 63 
self-, 102-3, 108 
temporal, 130, 135, 141 
See also God, knowledge of; human 
knowledge 
language, 5, 9, 12, 17, 23, 58-59, 64, 100 
law 
giver of, 106 
religious, 3, 5-6, 23, 77, 96, 136, 157, 
161,173, 181-82,213-14,219-20, 
224-25, 244 
revealed, 1-2, 48, 64, 163, 172, 203, 212 
lesson, 3, 49 
library, 170 
life, 6, 12, 93, 100, 109, 131, 141, 144, 163, 
166-67, 174, 181, 189, 195, 204, 209, 
212, 215-18, 233 
light, 6, 12, 56, 59, 91, 128, 131, 155, 164, 
166, 168-69, 193, 240 
lightning, 162 
line, 25, 79, 92, 111, 153, 158 
linguistics, 58, 244. See also grammar 
link, 84, 88, 100, 189 
lion, 75 
liver, 217 
logic, xvii-xviii, 8-10, 17, 110, 127, 132, 
182, 191, 225, 230, 231, 232, 235, 237 
logical sciences, 2, 4, 9, 11 
logicians, 9, 191, 239, 242 
Lord, 71, 107, 144,210,212,219 
love, lover, 89, 94-95, 107, 209-11 
lunar. See moon 
magic, 162-63, 222, 243 
magnet, 222 
man, 1, 3, 5, 15-16, 23, 65, 75, 82, 87-88, 
101-2, 107, 113, 129, 136, 139, 149, 
156-57, 159, 170-71, 174, 176, 179, 
181, 188-89, 191-93, 198, 209-10, 
213, 221-22, 236, 238 
mankind, 106, 211, 226. See also humanity 
Maqasid al-faldsifa (The aims of the 
philosophers), xvii 
masses, 2, 3 materials, materialist, xvi, 10, 28, 38, 41, 
48, 52, 55, 65, 78, 123-24, 184, 198, 
202, 218-19 
mathematics, 4, 6, 8, 11 
mean, Aristotelian doctrine of, xix, 
212-13, 244 
measure, measurable, 20, 31, 36—40, 
186-87, 198 
Mecca, 158 
mediation, 12, 29, 64-65, 72, 115, 120, 
129, 135, 141-42, 145, 155, 159, 167, 
172, 201, 203, 222 
medicine, 8, 162, 166, 168, 179, 217 
memory, 155-56, 180 
messenger. See God, messengers of 
metaphor, 12, 55, 56-59, 63-64, 94, 
131, 149, 156, 163, 187-88, 214, 239 
interpretation of, xxi, 7, 156, 214-15, 
236 
metaphysics, xvi, 2-4, 8, 9, 11, 14, 107, 160 
meteorological, 162 
mind, 4, 38, 41-45, 51, 53, 58, 82-83, 
87-88, 90,99,101, 106,114-15, 119, 133, 
164, 173-74, 189-92, 195-200, 233 
miracles, xvii, xxiv-xxv, 3, 76, 106, 
163-66, 171-72, 174, 222, 239, 241 
Mi'yar al-'ilm (The standard for 
knowledge), xvii-xviii, 10-11, 230 
modality, 2, 7, 24, 44, 73, 92, 96, 127-28, 
170, 185, 191, 196, 200, 203-4, 232 
modus ponens, 237 
modus tollens, 242 
moon, 6, 66-67, 135, 163, 165, 218 
moral, 162, 181, 203, 213 
Moses, 163, 239 
mother, 179, 196 
mountain, 49, 129, 169 
mouse, 173 
mouth, 165 
Muhammad, 1, 137. See also God, 
messengers of 
multiplicity, 17-18, 64-65, 67-68, 70, 
73-76, 84, 86-87, 89, 102-5, 108, 
112-14, 117-18, 124, 139-40, 183, 195, 
202, 224, 234 
Munkar wa Nakir, 219 
muscle, 92-93, 180 
Muslims, 59, 96, 121, 125, 131, 165, 
212, 237 
al-MustasJa min usul al-din (The choice 
essentials of the principles of 
religion), xix 

Page 511:
Index 255 
Muctazila, 7, 50, 96, 140, 216,22$ 232, 
238, 244 
Nakir. See Munkar wa Nakir 
natural, 26, 56, 81, 126, 128-29, 132, 
145-47, 164-65, 203, 226, 232, 237, 
239, 244 
natural sciences, 2, 161, 222 
necessary, 15-16, 32, 36, 38, 41-42, 67, 
81-82, 102, 110-11, 115, 118, 121, 
126-29, 147, 163, 166, 189, 193, 206, 
222, 226, 233, 234, 236, 241 
consequence, 10, 19, 30, 33, 45, 47, 
53, 56, 68, 71, 83, 101-3, 105, 
108, 131-32, 137, 155, 158, 173, 
179, 194, 197 
Necessary Existent, 28, 41, 43, 69, 71-72, 
74, 81, 84-99, 112-14, 116-17, 119, 
124, 142, 204, 207, 236 
necessity, xvi, xx, 4, 17-24, 26, 29, 32, 
43-44, 46, 56, 67-72, 76, 79, 84-89, 
97, 111-14, 116, 118, 120, 124, 128-29, 
131, 133, 142-43, 154, 163, 166, 179, 
189, 222, 230, 232, 233, 236, 237, 
239-40, 241 
newborn. See infant 
nodes, 6, 121-23, 135, 147 
nonexistence, 15, 19, 21, 27, 31-32, 34, 
37, 42, 44, 49-54, 59-63, 83, 86, 90, 
93-95, 116-19, 120, 134-36, 166, 176, 
188, 202, 205-7, 216 
north, 25, 29 
nose, 193, 217 
nourishment, 196, 209, 216, 219, 221 
number, 7-9, 17-19, 24, 37, 48, 67-68, 
74, 79-80, 82-83, 102, 104, 120, 155, 
159-60, 182, 202, 219 
obedience, 136, 144, 149-51, 165 
obliterate, obliteration, 6, 197, 212, 213 
obstacle, 16, 194 
occult, 171 
oil, 156, 164 
old age, 194, 197, 219, 221 
omen, 75 
oneness, 65, 79, 124. See also God, unity of 
onion, 7, 9 
optics, 49 
orb, 6, 135 
orbit, 24 
order, 66, 80-81, 87, 91-94, 121, 126, 128, 
131, 150, 152, 172, 174, 176-77, 181, 210, 220-21, 223-25, 240, 241, 242. 
See also universal order 
ordinances, 1 
organ, 28, 92, 94, 136, 165, 186, 189-91, 
193, 195, 211, 217, 221, 223 
organic, 92, 217 
origin, origination, 7, 9, 12-14, 19, 21, 29, 
31, 35, 40-41, 43-45, 47, 52, 54, 55, 
62, 65, 83, 119-20, 122-23, 125, 127, 
' 129, 131, 133, 140-41, 145-46, 206-7, 
219, 225, 232, 237 
original, 26, 62, 197, 215, 232, 233, 243 
parables, 208, 214 
paradise, 1, 11, 208, 212, 214, 217, 225 
participation, 110-12, 201 
particular, xx-xxi, 10-11, 26, 35, 44, 
70, 75, 101, 130, 132, 134, 136, 140, , 
153-55, 157-61, 164, 180, 186, 191, 
198-99, 203-4, 221, 226, 230-31, 233, 
234, 235, 238, 239, 240 
path, 1, 3, 7, 9, 80, 104, 135, 139 
patient, 46, 91 
pearl, 221 
pears, 173 
pen, 92-93, 154, 156-57 
perceiver, 136, 200-1 
perfection, 49, 54, 91-95, 100, 107, 
129-30, 143, 150-52, 208, 210, 220 
permanent, 30, 60, 63-64, 66, 85, 99, 
139-40, 168, 192, 216, 223 
perpetual, 13, 29, 62, 63, 141, 146, 163, 
219 
phases, 174, 220-21 
physical, 11,214,217,219,244 
physics, 161 
physiognomy, 162 
piety, 156, 212. See also righteousness, 
righteous 
pig, 95, 210 
pilgrimage, 157 
plant, 67, 162, 172, 216, 221 
Plato, 2, 4, 12, 19, 202 
pleasure, 11, 95, 180, 208-14, 219 
poetry, 211 
poles, 25, 73 
pomegranate, 7, 9 
positive attributes, 7, 85, 88 
possibility, 13, 21, 23-24, 27, 36-37, 
39-45, 47-48, 52-53, 58, 62, 68-69, 
72, 76, 81-83, 92-95, 122, 124, 144, 
150, 157, 159, 163, 165, 166-67, 

Page 512:
256 Index 
possibility (continued), 169-72, 174, 
205-7, 214, 223-25, 231, 232, 233, 
234, 239-40 
posteriority, 12, 21, 27, 30, 40, 62-63, 230 
post-eternal, 47, 202, 204, 206-7 
potency, 90, 150, 206-7, 242-43 
potential, 142, 150, 205, 206-7, 244 
practical faculty, 164, 180-81, 213 
prayer, 1,5,6, 137,210 
precede, 15, 21, 28, 31, 34, 36-37, 40-41, 
44-45, 61-62, 80-81, 90, 124, 154, 
191, 196, 202, 205, 224 
pre-eternal, xx, 12, 19, 31, 39, 46-48, 52, 
60, 62-63, 78, 82, 89-90, 98, 100, 
116-17, 122, 125, 202, 205-7, 219, 226, 
237 
preserved tablet, 153, 155-56, 164 
previous, 15, 48, 50, 51, 61-62, 96-97, 
105, 117, 134, 139, 142, 145, 157, 
170, 174, 177, 185-86, 191, 193,214, 
216,219 
primary, 41, 182, 233, 243 
principle, 5, 9, 29-30, 40, 64-65, 67-73, 
76, 78-79, 82, 87-91, 93-94, 96, 
101-5, 107, 111, 115, 121-22, 128, 133, 
136, 140-41, 146-47, 150, 152, 156, 
168-69, 172, 181, 203, 210, 232, 234, 
240, 241 
privation, 53-55, 80, 93-94 
procreation, 161, 173, 224 
properties, 136, 163, 173, 223 
prophet, prophecy, xvii, 1, 3, 5, 6, 76-77, 
106, 137, 144, 152, 156, 159, 164-65, 
171-74,214,219,222,226,239,241 
prophethood, 76, 137, 172, 214, 239, 241 
punishment, 149, 208, 225 
pupil, 142, 168 
purification, 165,208,211,213 
Qawd'id al-'aqd'id (The principles of 
belief), xxiii, xxiv, xxv, 232, 244 
qualities, 28, 40-41, 54, 75, 77, 117, 126, 
145-47, 169, 171-73, 176, 181, 185, 212 
quantitative, quantity, 8, 20, 24, 36-38, 
72-74, 77, 87-88, 108, 119, 121-22, 
157, 164, 186-87, 202 
quiddity, 10, 77, 87-90, 99, 102, 104-5, 
107, 109-12, 114-15, 116-18, 120, 
237, 236 
Qur'an, xxi, xxvi, 2, 71, 103, 153-54, 
163-64, 211-14, 219, 223, 230, 238 rain, 162, 165, 172, 223 
ram, 75 
rancor, 8, 159 
rank, 2, 12, 65-66, 208, 210 
reality, 37, 55, 57, 60, 63-64, 87-89, 100, 
102, 105-7,109-11, 114-15,116-18, 124, 
126, 138-39, 149, 198, 206, 210, 216 
receptacle, 14, 21, 28, 41, 43, 51, 66, 
98-100, 135, 140, 168-69, 173, 175, 
182, 184-86, 188-89, 191-92, 195, 
201-2, 205, 207, 242 
reckless, 212-13 
redness, 85, 113-14 
reflection, 9, 13, 17, 19, 23-24, 76, 104, 
106-7, 116, 126, 133, 194-95, 230, 237 
relations, relationship, 27, 29, 34, 55, 
75-77, 89, 105, 138-39, 150, 152, 154, 
162, 168, 173, 189, 204, 212, 231, 232, 
233, 240 
relativity, 32, 41, 43, 68, 121, 231 
religion, 1-3, 5-8, 23, 59, 77, 96, 136, 157, 
161, 173, 181-82, 213-14, 219-20, 
224-25, 232 
renewal, 30, 51, 157-58, 199-200, 213, 216 
repugnancy, 20, 51, 58, 70, 94, 129, 137, 
169, 185, 241 
repulsion, 57, 189 
resurrection, xx, xxi, xxv, 7, 11, 156, 181, 
203, 208, 213-24, 226, 242 
revelation, 2, 6, 48, 64, 106, 144, 163, 172, 
203, 212, 214-15 
revivification, 163, 165, 203 
revolve, 36-37, 145, 158, 205 
righteousness, righteous, 210, 214, 219. 
See also piety 
ring, 30 
rites, 1 
rivers, 20 
rotation, 18-19, 25, 27, 34, 36-37, 48, 
149, 151, 172, 176, 202, 239 
rubies, 49, 221 
saints, 1, 152, 222 
saliva, 165 
satiety, 58, 155, 166, 168 
satisfaction, 56, 76, 91-92, 149, 151 
Saturn, 18, 67 
science, 2, 4, 6, 8-9, 11, 18, 49, 156, 
160-63, 174,181,195,211,222 
scorpion, 173-74 
sea, 20 ; 

Page 513:
Index 257 
secret, 24, 152, 174, 211 
sects, sectarian, 2, 5, 8, 106, 226 
seeds, 7, 9, 156, 170, 173, 218, 221 
seeker, 9, 57, 76, 93, 146-51, 175, 180, 
204, 212 
seer, 132, 187, 206 
self, 3, 20, 45, 69, 84, 100, 102-3, 129, 
151, 184, 192, 196, 212 
self-awareness, 71 
self-knowledge. See knowledge, self-
self-subsistence, 5, 11, 41, 64, 66-67, 83, 
86, 97, 108-9, 126, 153, 163, 178, 181, 
215,219 
senility, 85, 194 
sensation, 195, 199, 201 
senses, xviii, 44, 49, 51, 76, 130, 136-37, 
145,156, 159-60,164,178-80, 183,186, 
188, 190-92, 194, 198-200, 209, 213 
sensual, 210 
sequence, 137, 223 
serpent, 163, 165, 176 
servants, 156, 210, 214 
sexual intercourse, 209-10. See also 
copulation 
shadow, 6, 30-31, 56, 91, 158 
shame, 104, 107-8 
shape, 8, 21, 25-26, 34, 62, 73, 75, 144, 
150, 179, 184, 186-87, 192, 220-21, 233 
sickness, 91, 195, 209 
sight, xviii, 3, 132, 135, 167-68, 178, 184, 
188, 190-91, 193-96, 209, 234 
similars, 22, 24-26, 122, 147 
simplicity, simple, 25-26, 65-66, 68, 73, 
107, 115, 116, 129,205-7,220-21 
simultaneous, 30-31, 37, 43, 69, 203, 207, 
240-41 
single indivisible substance, 183. See also 
atom; indivisible; substance 
singular, 45 
sinner, 213 
size, 20, 48-49, 72, 75, 199-200, 202, 233 
sleep, 68, 71, 155-57, 164 
smell, 175, 190-92, 195 • , 
snake, 172-74 
snow, 58 
Socrates, 2 
solar, 6, 18. See also sun 
son, 104-5, 167, 243 
sophistry, 2, 49 
sorcery, 222 
soul, xx, xxiv, xxv—xxvi, 11, 13, 19—20, 
29-30, 42-45, 52, 54, 58, 65-68, 74-75, 77, 80-83, 91-93, 120-21, 123, 
126, 135, 141, 144-45, 150, 153, 
155-57, 159-60, 162-65, 171-72, 178, 
180-84, 186, 189, 192, 194-95, 198, 
201-5, 206, 208-9, 211-21, 223, 238, 
239, 243-44 
space, 5, 25, 27, 33, 35, 37-40, 63-64, 74, 
81, 86, 126, 136, 149, 153, 158, 161, 
165, 178, 181, 183, 187, 210, 231 
species, 10, 44, 67, 75, 80, 84-85, 88, 101, 
105, 113, 115, 125, 139-40, 150-51, 161 
speculation, 2-3, 13-14, 124, 181-82 
sperm, 80, 167, 170, 172-73, 176, 196-97, 
203, 216, 218, 221, 223 
sphere, 6-8, 18, 24-29, 33, 36, 38, 67-68, 
70, 73, 75-77, 119-23, 135, 141, 146, 
150, 157-58, 218, 231, 233, 239 
spirit, spiritual, 162, 167, 178, 208-9, 214, 
216, 219, 240 
square, 108, 150 
staff, 163, 165, 172, 176, 239 
Standard for Knowledge, The, xvii-xviii, 
10-11 
stars, 18, 24-25, 27-29, 67, 75, 162, 173. 
See also astral; astronomical 
stone, 56-57, 129, 145-47, 158, 169-70, 
175,221 
storm, 162, 165 
sublunar, 29, 123, 150, 161 
subsistence, 41, 43, 52, 59, 81-83, 87-89, 
97, 100-1, 108-9, 112, 163, 176, 188, 
191, 193-94, 200-1, 207, 215 
substance, 5, 11, 42, 49, 51-52, 64-66, 
70-71, 75, 83, 89-90, 93, 110-11, 
152, 153, 162-63, 173, 175-76, 178, 
181-83, 185, 187, 202, 205, 207, 213, 
217, 219, 221, 226, 239 
sun, xxi, 6, 12, 18, 48-49, 56, 59, 65, 79, 
82,91, 119, 121, 127-28, 131, 134-35, 
158, 166, 168-69 
surface, 25, 33-35, 40, 146, 218 
sweetness, 178, 193, 209 
syllogism, 9, 48, 106, 126, 144, 182, 184, 
194, 231, 237-38. See also conditional 
syllogism 
symbol, 156 
Tahdfut al-faldsifa (The incoherence of 
the philosophers), xv—xxvii 
Tahdfut al-Tahdfut (The incoherence of 
the Incoherence), xvi, xxiii 
talc, 171-72 

Page 514:
258 Index 
talismanic arts, 162, 173-74, 222 
tawdtur, 239 
teacher, 4, 154 
temporal event, 14, 27-30, 36, 50, 58, 
83, 101, 119, 123, 130, 135, 140-43, 
155, 168, 176, 205. See also event 
temporal knowledge. See knowledge, 
temporal 
tendons, 180 
terrestrial, xxi, 74, 152, 155, 161-62, 173, 
240, 241 
theologians, 5, 9, 21, 50, 61, 104, 175, 
181-82, 198, 215, 233 
theology, 9. See also kalam 
theoretical 
faculty, 181 
investigation, 79-80 
matters, hidden, 193 
rational faculty, 164 
reason, 230—31 
reflection, 9, 17, 19, 23-24, 76 
think, thinker, 2-3, 7-8, 13, 22, 71, 77, 
83, 104, 106, 195, 219, 221, 223 
Ihroat, 224 
throne, 219 
lime, 7, 12, 14-15, 20-28, 30-42, 47, 61, 
63, 74, 80, 82-83, 86, 101, 130, 134, 
136-37, 140-41, 161, 171-72, 216, 224, 
231 
tongue, 58, 223 
torment, 213-14, 219 
town, 151, 174, 216 
tradition, 2, 6-7, 71,223 
transformation, 29, 123, 149, 161, 167, 
174,176,221 
treasure, 155 
tree, 89, 156, 170, 197-98, 200, 216 
tremor, 174, 176, 241 
triangle, 28, 88, 111, 150,235 
trinity, 67-68, 72 
truth, 1, 2, 4, 7, 18-19, 78, 80, 106, 182, 
184, 193, 214, 224, 230, 237, 239 
turban, 220, 222 
unbelievers, 2-3, 8, 136, 229. See also 
disbelievers 
uncaused, 79, 112, 114, 121,234 
uncreated, 125, 233 
unification, 22, 140-41, 154, 189 
unity. See God, unity of 
universal, xx, 17, 57, 130, 198-200, 235 universal order, 24, 73. See also order 
universe, 132 
vanity, 3 
vapor, 52, 217 
vegetative, 123, 181 
veil, 156 
vein, 3, 221, 223 
vessel, 197, 199 
vices, 181 
victim, 59 
vilification, xxiv, 171, 243 
virtue, 1-2, 13, 51, 181, 213 
visage, 108, 214 
vision, 156, 170 
void, 33, 35-36, 38, 161, 231 
volition, voluntary, 11, 24, 56, 58, 128-29, 
144-46, 149, 154, 157, 169, 174, 176, 
180, 220, 241 
wahib al-suwar, 240 
walk, 136, 155, 158, 165 
wall, 56, 165 
Waqifiyya, 8, 219 
warrior, 210 
weakness, 4, 6, 9, 13-14, 115, 193-96, 
212 
wealth, 211-12 
weight, 103, 134 
west, 18, 26-27, 151-52, 161 
What Galen Believes as Sound Judgment, 12 
wheat, 173 
whim, 2, 173, 213 
whiteness. See blackness, and whiteness 
wife, 15, 156 
wind, 162, 165 
wisdom, 24-25 
wolf, 179, 183-84, 186 
womb, 167, 172, 203, 220-21, 223 
women, 210—11 
work, 8, 23, 35, 37,46, 55, 61, 193, 211, 213 
worms, 173, 217 
worship, 1, 144, 160,211,213 
wrath, 149 
year, 17-18, 20, 36, 48-49, 135, 162, 
196-97, 223 
youth, 197, 221 
Zayd. See cAmr, and Zayd 
zodiac, 24 

Page 515:
About the Translator 
MICHAEL E. MARMURA was born in Jerusalem on November 11, 1929. He 
received his B.A. in 1953 from the University of Wisconsin and went on to ob­
tain both an M.A. and a Ph.D. from the University of Michigan. He is professor 
emeritus at the University of Toronto, where he taught from 1959 until 1995 
and where he twice chaired the Department of Middle East and Islamic Studies. 
Dr. Marmura has published medieval Arabic philosophical texts and trans­
lations, as well as numerous articles on Islamic philosophy, many of them 
devoted to the thought of Avicenna and al-Ghazali. His publications include an 
edition of Ibn Sina's Fi ithbat al-nubuwwdt (Proof of prophecy); Refutation by 
Alexander of Aphrodisias of Galen's Treatise on the Theory of Motion, with N. Rescher; 
and Islamic Theology and Philosophy: Studies in Honor of George F Hourani, of 
which he was the editor. He has also published a history of Islamic philosophy 
incorporated in Der Islam II: Politische Entwicklungen und theologische Konzepte, 
coauthored with W. Montgomery Watt. 

Page 516:
A Note on the Type 
The English text of this book was set in BASKERVILLE, a typeface originally 
designed by John Baskerville (1706-1775), a British stonecutter, letter designer, 
typefounder, and printer. The Baskerville type is considered to be one of the 
first "transitional" faces—a deliberate move away from the "old style" of the 
Continental humanist printer. Its rounded letterforms presented a greater dif­
ferentiation of thick and thin strokes, the serifs on the lower-case letters were 
more nearly horizontal, and the stress was nearer the vertical—all of which 
would later influence the "modern" style undertaken by Bodoni and Didot in 
the 1790s. Because of its high readability, particularly in long texts, the type 
was subsequently copied by all major typefoundries. (The original punches and 
matrices still survive today at Cambridge University Press.) This adaptation 
of Baskerville, designed by the Compugraphic Corporation in the 1960s, is 
a notable departure from other versions in its overall typographic evenness 
and lightness in color. To enhance its range, supplemental diacritics and liga­
tures were created in 1997 for exclusive use in the Islamic Translation Series. 
TYPOGRAPHY BY JONATHAN SALTZMAN 
• 

Page 517:
The Incoherence of the Philosophers ranks among 
the most important works of one of the most 
fascinating thinkers in the history of Islam. 
Born in the eastern Iranian city of Tus in 
450 A.H. (1058 c.E.), Abu Hamid Muhammad 
al-Ghazali also died there, relatively young, in 
505 A.H. (1111 c.E.). Between those two dates, 
however, he established himself as a pivotal 
figure throughout the Islamic world. By his 
early thirties he was a pre-eminent legal scholar 
and teacher in Baghdad. But then, overcome by 
skepticism and finding no other satisfactory way 
to combat his doubts, he abandoned his aca­
demic position to devote himself to reattaining 
religious certainty through the practice of Sufi 
mysticism. By his own account, he succeeded. 
Alter somewhat more than a decade of travel 
and ascetic contemplation, and at the instance of 
the sultan at that time, he emerged again into 
public life and teaching during his final years. 
The Incoherence of the Philosophers—itself pitched 
at a very sophisticated philosophical level— 
contends that, although Muslim philosophers 
such as al-Farabi and Ibn Sina (Avicenna) 
boasted of absolutely unassailable arguments 
on crucial matters of theology and metaphysics, 
they could not, in fact, deliver on their claims. 
Additionally, maintained al-Ghazali, some of 
their assertions represented mere disguised 
heresy and unbelief. The great twelfth-century 
Andalusian philosopher and Aristotle commen­
tator Ibn Rushd (Averroes) attempted to refute 
al-Ghazali's critique in his own book The Incoher­
ence of the Incoherence, but al-Ghazali's book remains 
widely read and influential today. 

Page 518: [No Text Extracted]

