Page 1:
%
‘ YV\\&5 ’&2'G3Z<* ,• A •"v7N w\MIrMr*y >AVA\
-0^ /^_---XV-' r^??i
h-iQ hs(rH
3imam  Abu  Named  AL-GHAZAU  
(450-505  H.=  1058-1111  A,D.)A — - -"4 A reH? rf i-.4 : v> :_
Al 1 III  | Ik*
1 K : 7fell:%- £ &• ■•
J V
j&£§§£:
;-ySgvV-
1 i
id!>sI i 1I o’
i£sH£' A £I. B-5* v -
IHYA*  ULUM
[§ffA
' "®r5A?7 : S&f.
’WMfS^ll  ■«***>ji|
-v -oiisJ^.v-■P lHVh  iinilr\
UN  (SlJUi*
»itytm « &
1 s mA
£ .C 4- -3*
<^pS-<^T/e ! ta© i s®;■ \V• TO •Iiho ? •A3.'V,f-£cAv m •\ • j
, St;
!•• V m};88:
Ai
I
*-* K V
K-
'• kT?.•*.
E! • :(Amfc i
7*SpM  #AIJflsJ
zkrtitsm
«^V «£** f*". <*\ <' f
#»■ \ ^ • i :
>> ■■>/»»■  %>=y —t/3f% "
. > v-\ 4■
I>m
II:^S:.© ■
•■s
Beirut-  Lebanon
A^SbUa\L . A-*^  
. ^ 3v'’'A <■. !.
}rj~'- sfe;a
-r>'; ■ j •«
: i


Page 2: [No Text Extracted]

Page 3:
Imam  Abu Hamed  AL-GHAZALI  
(450-505  H. = l 058-1111  A.D.)
REVIVAL
€7 EIELI@B0ri ’3 SCIEHCiS
(EHYA'  UUJM  AD-DIN)
Translated  by
Mohammad  Mahdi  al-Sharif
Volume  I
The quarter  of The acts of worship
JLjftMAIIjL
Oar Al'Kolod  AHImiyah
1971
1st. by Mohammad  All Baydoun  1971 Beirut  - Lebanon  
ttablle  par Mohamad  All Baydoun  1971 Beyrouth  - liban


Page 4:
=s
=x:
=s
w.Z>7hrtpyAvww.aMmiyah.com  info@al-ilmiyah.com  sales @al-ilmiyah.com  baydoun@al-ilmiyah.com
ii
^7
31 Title REVIVAL
OF RELIGION'S  SCIENCES  
(IHYA'  ULUM  AD-DIN)
3?Classification:  Jurisprudence  and sufism  
Author  : Imam  Abu Homed  AL-GHAZALI
Translator  .* Mohammad  Mahdi  al-Sharif
: Dar Al-Kotob  Al-llmiyah  
: 2784 (4 volumes)
:17*24  
: 2011 
:LebanonV
Publisher
Pages
Size
Year
Printed  in 
Edition>7
:s:>7
! :1”
>S
i»y j
7-
&
*2?
&
Dar Al-Kotob  
Al-ilmi yahExclusive  rights by © Dar Al-Kotob  Al-llmiyah
Beirut-Lebanon  No part of this publication  may be 
translated,reproduced,distributed  in any form or by any 
means,or  stored  in a data base or retrieval system,without  
the prior written permission  of the publisher.
Tous droits  exdusivement  reserves  a © Dar Al-Kotob  Al-llmiyah s •? 
Beyrouth-Liban  Toute  representation,edition,  traduction  ou reproduction  
meme  partielle.par  tous precedes,  en tous pays,farte  sans autorisation  
prealable  signee  par I'editeur  est illidte  et exposerait  le contrevenant  a ? ~ 
des poursuites  judioaires
A i 1 a tj | jlu_l aIojAmla lolaJlj  <Lu^Vl <u£UI  —
J^uuj Sjlc.1 jl 4-4J-jh jl j] jinirij
AJli.il _jl r.jm lS SJojjIiI _)1 jl >L«l£
• AoaIjaj VI ..-jl ^ jl>7- o
o
oEst. by Mohamad  AJi Baydoun  
1B71 Beirut  - Lebanon
Aramoun,  al-Quebbah,  
Da» Al-Kotob  Al-ilmiyah  Bldg. 
Tel : +961 5 804 810/11/12  
♦961 5 804813  
P o Bo*. 11-9424  Beirut-Lebanon,  
Rryad ai-So!oh  Beirut 1107 2290o&cn
I
£2 'O' inm a
§• CT*•H ir\inFa*
* ------m" £
•o C*
CT» Z
s 5« jU I.^jytyz.2J-t-^11 0 A- LAI -/U/\T  
+N1' 0 A-LA1T*cn
n-VYV\.H-UYl:
m


Page 5:
IN THE  NAME  OF ALLAH,  MOST  GRACIOUS,  MOST  MERCIFUL  
REVIVAL  OF RELIGIOUS  SCIENCES
Firstly,  I begin  with the praise  of Allah  Almighty,  even though  our praise  is 
quite insufficient  and too little to be compared  with His real glory. Secondly,  I 
invoke  His blessings  upon all the Messengers  and in particular  upon the greatest  
and the Seal of His Messengers,  Muhammad  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
all of them".  Thirdly,  I pray for His help and grace that I should  keep firm,  
willing  and motivated  to write  the book  "Ihya'  Ulum  Ad-Din  'Revival  of religion's  
sciences'".
Fourthly,  O slanderer,  O heedless,  O rejecter  of truth,  what  removed  from my 
tongue  the impediment  of silence  and put on my neck  the necklace  of arguments  
and reasons,  and made  it incumbent  upon me to reply to your arguments,  is the 
closing  of your eyes from open truths,  and rather  your dependence  upon  what  is 
insignificant  and untrue which made you praise ignorance,  and stirring  up 
opposition  against  him who wants to deprive  some of his deeds of the evil 
practice  and habits  of men or expresses  his wish to put his learning  to practice  in 
order that Allah Almighty  would purify his soul, by addressing  himself  to 
religious  service  and doing his best to make expiation  for the sins he has 
committed  in his past life and for which he has become  disappointed,  and 
keeping  himself  far from the society  of those  persons  about  whom  the lawgiver,  
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "He who will 
receive  the greatest  punishment  on the Day of  Judgement  will be the learned  man  
whom  Allah  Almighty  has benefited  not from  his knowledge."
I'm quite sure, by my life, that there is no reason  for you to reject  the truth  
barring  the fact that the epidemic  which  has overwhelmed  most  of the people  has 
also overpowered  you; and it is that which  diverted  them to make sense to the 
rules and principles  of this affair,  and fail to notice  that this matter  is very serious  
and grave,  that the hereafter  is coming  forward  and this world  is retreating,  that 
death  is very near and the journey  is long,  that provision  is very little,  that dangers  
are great  but the paths  are blocked.
It is difficult,  exhausting  and tiring  to tread the crowded  and dangerous  path  
of the hereafter  with no guide  nor companion.  The guides  for the path are the 
learned  men who are the heirs of the Prophets,  of whom  the times  are short  and 
it is only the superficial  who are left, most of whom  have been possessed  by 
iniquity  and overpowered  by Satan.  Everyone  of them was so absorbed  in his 
immediate  fortune  that he came  to see good  as evil and evil as good,  and it is for 
this reason  that the science  of religion  disappeared  and the minaret  of the true 
faith extinguished  all over  the world.
They  gave the people  the false impression  that there  was no knowledge  except
3


Page 6:
Prelude
such laws of government  as used by judges  to setde  disputes  when  the mob dots;  
or such of arguments  as used by the vainglorious  to overcome  and silence  the 
opponents;  or die elaborate  and flowery  language  with which  the preacher  seeks  
to draw die attention  of the laymen;  and that's because  apart from these three,  
they could find no other  ways to snare  
world.
On the other  hand  the science  of the way to the hereafter,  well-trodden  by our 
righteous  predecessors  which  includes  what is described  in Allah's  Book  as law, 
wisdom,  knowledge,  enlightenment,  light, guidance,  and righteousness,  has 
disappeared  from  among  men and been  completely  a thing  forgotten.
Since this is a distress  which has befallen  the religion  and a grave calamity  
which  has put it in die shade,  I have seen it important  to address  myself  to the 
composition  of this book,  in order  to revive  the science  of religion,  to bring  to 
light the exemplary  lives of the deceased  imams,  and to show  such of branches  of 
knowledge  as regarded  of good use by the prophets  and the virtuous  
predecessors.
I have based  it upon four quarters:  the quarter  of the Acts of Worship,  the 
quarter  of the Habits  of Life, the quarter  of the Destructives,  and the quarter  of 
the saviors.
I have begun  the work  with the book  of knowledge  because  it is of the utmost  
significance  to define  first of all the knowledge  which  Allah  has commanded  the 
elite to seek,  on the tongue  of the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon  him".  In this respect,  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon  him" said: “Seeking  knowledge  is an obligation  due upon  every  Muslim. ” 
My goal from beginning  with this book on knowledge  is to distinguish  useful  
from harmful  knowledge,  as the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon  him" said: “We seek refuge  with Allah  from  useless  knowledge”  and also 
to shed light upon the deviation  of the people  of this age from right conduct,  
their delusion  as by a glistening  mirage,  and their satisfaction  with the husks  of 
knowledge  rather  than the pith.
The quarter  of the Acts of Worship  comprises  ten books:  The Book of 
Knowledge;  The Principles  of Faith;  The Mysteries  of Purification;  The Mysteries  
of Prayer;  The Mysteries  of Obligatory  Charity;  The Mysteries  of Fasting;  The  
Mysteries  of Hajj;  The Principles  of Reciting  the Qur ’an; Concerning  Invocations  
and Supplications;  and the Arrangement  of Litanies  (One should  recite  regularly  
everyday  of the Holy  Qur'an).
The quarter  of The customs  Of Life comprises  ten books:  The Etiquettes  
of Eating;  The Etiquettes  of Marriage;  The Etiquettes  of Earning  Sustenance;  
Concerning  the Lawful  and Unlawful;  The Etiquettes  of Companionship  and 
Fellowship  with the Different  Types of Men; Concerning  Seclusion;  The  
Etiquettes  of Journey;  the Etiquettes  of Music and Ecstasy;  Concerning  
Enjoining  Good and Forbidding  Evil; and The etiquettes  of Living as 
Exemplified  in the Prophetic  Manners.
The quarter  of the Destructives  comprises  ten books: Concerning  the4&V
<5
illegal  profit  and get the wealth  of this
V
*
'>•v
&
*
V;
^5
V.
*
£
%
j-S
i§
> :
>—
i
£


Page 7:
5 Prelude
Wonders  of the Heart;  Concerning  the Discipline  of the Soul; Concerning  the 
Evil of the Two lusts: The Appetite  of the Stomach  and the Sexual  Desire;  The 
Evil of Tongue;  The Evil of Anger,  Resentment,  and Envy; The Evil of the 
World;  The Evil of Wealth and Greediness;  The Evil of Showiness  and 
Hypocrisy;  The Evil of Pride  and Vanity;  and The Evils  of Haughtiness.
The quarter  of the Saviors  comprises  ten books:  Concerning  Repentance;  
Concerning  Patience  and Gratitude;  Concerning  Fear and Hope; Concerning  
Poverty  and Asceticism;  Concerning  Allah's Oneness  and Trust; Concerning  
Love,  Longing,  Intimacy  and Contentment;  Concerning  Intentions,  Truthfulness,  
and Sincerity;  Concerning  Self-Examination  and Self-Reckoning;  Concerning  
Reflection;  and Concerning  Death.
In the quarter  of the Acts of Worship  I make  a mention  of some  of its hidden  
etiquette,  the niceties  of its principles,  and the mysteries  of its meanings,  of which  
the active  learned  man is in need,  and without  their knowledge  none  will be well-  
acquainted  with the science  of the hereafter.  Most of this information  has been  
neglected  in jurisprudence  studies.
In the quarter  of the Customs  of Life I make  a mention  of the principles  of 
practical  religion  widespread  among  men, its profound  subdeties,  complicated  
practice,  and the piety  which  lurks in its principles  of conduct,  without  which  no 
religious  man can do.
In the quarter  of the Destructives  I deal with every  blameworthy  trait to which  
the Qur ’an refers,  the way of purifying  the soul and the cleansing  of the heart  
therefrom.  I therefore  put a clear definition  to every  one of these  traits,  and refer  
to the particular  truth about it, the source from which it originates,  the evil 
consequences  to which  it leads,  its indicative  signs,  and the way of its treatment,  
with support,  in all of those, of evidences  from the Holy Qur ’an, Prophetic  
tradition,  and narrations.
In the quarter  of the Saviors,  I discuss  every praiseworthy  trait and every  
desirable  quality  characteristic  of those made near to the Presence  of Allah  
Almighty,  as well as the saints,  by means  of which  the servant  seeks  to draw  near  
to the Lord  of the worlds.  I give a certain  definition  to every  quality,  and refer to 
the truth about  it, the source  from  which  it originates,  the fruit obtained  from it, 
the particular  sign by which  it is known,  the excellence  which  renders  it desirable,  
with support  for illustration  from  the transmitted  law and intellectual  reason.
It is true that several  works  have been  composed  in some  of these  aspects,  but 
five characteristics  distinguish  this work  from  them:
First,  by clarifying  what they have obscured  and making  clear  what they have  
treated  casually.
Second,  by arranging  what they have disarranged,  and organizing  what they  
have  scattered.
Third,  by condensing  what they have elaborated,  and correcting  what they  
have approved.
Fourth,  by deleting  what they have repeated  and verifyed  what they have set
down.


Page 8:
Prelude6
Fifth,  by determining  ambiguous  matters  which  have been beyond  the reach  
of understanding  and never  dealt  with in any work.
For although  all might  follow  the 
should  not proceed  independently  and bring  to light something  unknown,  giving  
particular  concern  to what his colleagues  have forgotten,  or have noticed,  but 
overlooked  to mention  them in writing,  or being prevented  from uncovering  
them.method,  there is no reason  why one same
K
>s
>• These  are the characteristics  which  distinguish  this work which  is cumulative  
of the sciences  referred  to.!
Two factors  have  urged  me to base this work  upon  four quarters.
The first and original  motive  is that this system  of research  and exposition  is
turn to the hereafter  is;
necessarily  essential  because  the science  by which  we 
divided  into two: the science  of Practical  Religion,  and the science  of Revelation.
I mean  by the science  of Revelation  that by which  the knowledge  is revealed;  and 
I mean by the science  of practical  religion  the knowledge  as well as action  in 
accordance  with that knowledge.  The aim of this work is to deal only with the 
science  of practical  religion,  and not with that of Revelation,  which  one is not 
permitted  to record  in writing,  although  it is the ultimate  goal sought  for by 
saints,  and the wanted  desire  of the eyes of the Sincere.
The science  of practical  religion  is merely  a way which  leads to revelation  and 
the prophets  of Allah did not communicate  with the people  and lead them to 
Him except  through  the knowledge  of that way, to which they guided  them.  
Concerning  revelation  itself, the prophets  spoke only figuratively  and briefly  
through  signs and symbols,  because  they realized  the incapability  of man ’s mind  
to comprehend.  Therefore  since the learned  men are heirs of the prophets,  they  
cannot  but follow  their footsteps  and emulate  their  way.
On the other hand, the science  of practical  religion  is divided  into exoteric  
science,  which  deals  with the functions  of the organs,  and esoteric  science,  which  
deals with the functions  of the heart.  The bodily  organs  perform  either  acts of 
worship  or habits  of life, while  the heart,  as far as it is removed  from the organs,  
and rather  belongs  to the world  of dominion,  is subject  to either  praiseworthy  or 
blameworthy  effects. Consequently,  this science is divided  into two parts:  
outward  and inward.  The outward,  which  relates  to the organs,  is subdivided  into  
acts of worship  and habits  of life; and the inward,  which  relates  to the states  of 
the heart  and the qualities  of the soul, is subdivided  into what  is praiseworthy  and 
what is blameworthy.  All of these constitute  the four parts of the science  of 
practical  religion;  and there is no deviation  from such a classification  in 
considering  the science  of practical  religion.
My second  motive  for adopting  this kind of division  is that I have seen the 
genuine  interests  of students  in jurisprudence,  which  has become  popular  among  
those  who do not fear Allah,  for the sake of boasting  and exploiting  its influence  
and prestige  in arguments.  This jurisprudence  also is divided  into quarters;  and 
he who dresses  himself  in the dress of the beloved  will also be beloved,  I 
to be far from the idea that making  this book appear  in the form of£
!
:
:
■
*
*
SpS
**
*■
£
*
v
>:
V:
since%want not
5
V-


Page 9:
7 Prelude
books of jurisprudence  shall be a skillful  move to create interest  in it. For a 
similar reason, one of those who wanted  to attract the attention  of the 
magistrates  to the science  of medicine,  represented  it in a form of astronomical  
lists, arranging  it in tables  and numbers,  and called  it Tables  of Health,  in order,  
by so doing,  to have their concern  with that type of science  help in encouraging  
them to read it. Resourcefulness  in drawing  hearts  to the science  which  is good  
for the eternal  life is more  valuable  than that of drawing  them  to medicine  which  
benefits  nothing  but physical  health.  The fruit of this science  is the treatment  of 
the hearts  and souls  which  leads to a life that will persist  for ever and ever. How  
inferior,  therefore,  is the medicine  of the body,  which  is doomed  by necessity  to 
decay  before  long! We ask Allah  to help us achieve  success  and attain  guidance:  
verily,  He is Most  Generous,  All-Bounteous.


Page 10:
'
i*
¥
-
%
*
>
>>
>
>
>
>
*>
>
X
>
X
x
>
*
>-i
X
8
v .


Page 11:
r
Li
CHAPTER  ONE:  ON THE EXCELLENCE  OF KNOWLEDGE,  
TEACHING  AND LEARNING
The Virtue  Of Knowledge
Its proofs  from  the Holy  Qur'an  go as follows:
"There  is no god but He: that is the witness  of Allah,  His angels,  and those  
endued  with knowledge,  standing  firm on justice.  There  is no god but He the 
Exalted  in Power,  the Wise."  (A! Imran  18)
iJi y VajuL  il/ii  iJjij iSLiJij  jj> *j\ y /of ST Igl s>
Consider  how he Almighty  begins  with Himself,  and makes  the angels  rank  
second  to Him (as far as such witness  is concerned),  and the men of knowledge  
third to them;  and how sufficient  this is for honour,  excellence,  good  value and 
superiority!
Allah Almighty  says also: "AJIah will raise up, to (suitable)  ranks (and  
degrees),  those of you who believe  and who have been granted  Knowledge."  
(Al-Mujadilah  11)
4 *I| JU^JT  \yj\
In this respect,  it is narrated  on the authority  of Ibn Abbas  that he said: "The  
men of knowledge  have as much as seven hundred  degrees  higher  than the 
faithful  believers,  between  each two of which,  there is (as long distance  as to be 
covered  in) five-hundred-year  journey."
Allah Almighty  further  says: "Say: 'Should  those be equal, those who have  
knowledge  and those  who have  not?'"  (Az-Zumar  9)
He says: "It is those who endued  with knowledge  from amongst  Allah's  
servants  that fear Allah  most."  (Fatir  28)
He says: "Allah  suffices  for witness  between  me and you, the One Who is 
well-acquainted  with the knowledge  of the Book."  (Ar-Ra'd  43)
4 ;■§)) }•*===* ‘~±6 $
He Almighty  says also: "Said  he, who was well-acquainted  with the knowledge  
of the Book:  'I'm ready  to bring  it (the throne  of Sheba)  to you";  (An-Naml  40)
9


Page 12:
r—'
4The quarter  of the acts of worship
i iyj of cP vlL:i;  Isf y^sai  ^ ju* Ji* >
And this draws  the attention  to the fact that he was able (to bring  the throne  
immediately)  by virtue  of the power  of knowledge.
Allah  Almighty  says: "Those  who were endued  with knowledge  said: Woe to 
you! The reward  of Allah  (in the hereafter)  is much  better  for him who has faith,  
and amends  his work ’" (Al-Qasas  80)
i @ ^J.\\ AT±>Vy piffi  IjSji 'A >
Showing  that the superiority  of the hereafter  to this world in rank and 
position  could  not be known  but through  knowledge.
He Almighty  says: "Those  parables  We set forth for the people  (to learn  
therefrom),  and none understand  them but those  endued  with knowledge."  (Al- 
Ankabut  43)10
ui @ -5j t^u  mu >
He also says: "Had they referred  the matter  to the Messenger  and to those  
endued  with authority  from amongst  them,  surely,  those  of good understanding  
among  them  would  have known  it." (An-Nisa  83)£
i © A A  & A  4 % jj A 3h >
In this Holy  statement,  he refers  His Decision  of the events  to their faculty  of 
understanding,  and joins their rank to that of the Prophets  to anticipate  Allah's  
Decision.
It is said, in comment  on Allah's  saying:  "O Children  of Adam!  We have  
bestowed  raiment  upon  you to cover  your shame,  and splendid  vesture.  But the 
raiment  of righteousness,  that is the best" (Al-A'raf  26)
JUi Cs'Afi dr03 Oojj A'y-  ujjif  li 'fSi; ^ }
"The  raiment  refers  to knowledge,  the splendid  vesture  refers  to the certainty  
(of faith), and the raiment  of righteousness  denotes  to shyness  (i.e. refraining  
from  committing  religious  indiscretions).
Allah  Almighty  says: "We've  brought  about  a Book  to them,  Whose  (Verses)  
We've  explained  in detail  with knowledge."(AI-A'raf  52)>
>.
, <ybj  ebb }
He also says: "We should then relate to them (the narrations)  with  
knowledge.  "(Al-A'raf  7):>
*
He says: "But even,  it (the Qur'an)  is of evidently  clear signs in the breasts  of 
those  endued  with knowledge."  (Al-Ankabut  49)
i © VJ UaJlZ, Cj JJUJT  }jj > '£ >
He says: "He has created  man,  and taught  him speech  (and Intelligence)."  (Ar-  
Rahman  3:4)>.
;>•
>
>:


Page 13:
Book  One:  Knowledge 11
4 4-*-1p C|5 ^
He Almighty  makes  a mention  of that on the occasion  of reminding  him of 
such of blessings  as He has bestowed  upon  him.
In relation  to the proofs  from  the Prophet ’s sunnah  they go as follows:
(It is narrated  by both Al-Bukhari  and Muslims  and others  on the authority  of 
Mu'awiyah  that) The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "If Allah  
Almighty  intends  good for any one, he provides  him with the faculty  of religious  
understanding,  and gives  him the right  guidance  thereof."
(It is narrated  by At-Tirmidhi,  Abu Dawud,  Ibn Majah  and Ibn Hibban  on the 
authority  of Abu Ad-Darda'  that) The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  him"  
said: "No doubt,  the learned  men are the heirs  of Prophets  (as far as knowledge  is 
concerned)."  It is a well-known  fact that that there  is no rank superior  to that of 
Prophethood,  nor is there honour  much higher  than that of inheriting  such a 
rank.
(It is narrated  by At-Tirmidhi  and others  on the authority  of Abu Ad-Darda'  
that) The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "Those  in the Heavens  
and the earth always  ask for (Allah's)  Forgiveness  for the learned  man."  Which  
position  is then much better than that of him, for whom  the angels of the 
Heavens  and the earth  are engaged  in asking  for (Allah's)  Forgiveness?
(It is narrated  by Ibn Abd Al-Barr  on the authority  of Anas that) The 
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "No doubt,  wisdom  (acquired  
from knowledge)  increases  the one of high social  class in dignity,  and raises  even  
the slave so high that he could attain the rank of chiefs."  In this way, he draws  
the attention  to its (knowledge's)  advantage  in the world, even though  the 
hereafter,  as it is well-known,  is much  better,  more  abiding.
(It is narrated  by At-Tirmidhi  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that) The  
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "Two characteristics  never  
gather in a hypocrite:  the good (right) way and the faculty  of religious  
understanding."  However,  you should have no doubt in the tradition  
depending  upon the hypocrisy  of many religious  jurists of this time; for 
indeed,  he does not indicate  to the type of religious  jurisprudence  which  you 
might imagine.  Later on, the real meaning  of the faculty of religious  
intelligence  will be explained,  and we will see that a religious  jurist might  
attain  the highest  degree  when  he comes  to know  that the hereafter  is, by all 
means,  much better  than this world;  and once he is true to this knowledge,  
And once this knowledge  prevails  in him, he becomes  free from all kinds of 
hypocrisy  and showing  off.
(It is narrated  on the authority  of Al-Baihaqi  on the authority  of Abu Ad- 
Darda'  without  tracing  it up to) The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him"  
that he said: "The best of men is the learned  faithful  believer,  who will be of 
benefit  when there is need for him, and will benefit  himself  when there is no 
need for him."
(It is narrated  by Al-Hakim the authority  of Abu Ad-Darda'  that) The on


Page 14:
*
2
* The quarter  of the acts of worship
Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said: Faith  is naked,  since  its raiment  is 
righteousness,  its splendid  vesture is shyness (refraining  from committing  
religious  indiscretions)  and its fruit is knowledge."
(It is narrated  by Abu Na'im on the authority  of Ibn Abbas  that) The  
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "The closest  from amongst  
the people  to the rank of Prophethood  are those endued  with knowledge,  
and those who practice  Jihad (in Allah's  Way): as to those endued  with  
knowledge,  it is those  who guided  the people  to what  was brought  about  by 
the Messengers;  and as to those who practice  Jihad,  it is those who fight  
with their swords  (in Allah's  Way) to preserve  what was brought  about  by 
the Messengers."
(It is narrated  by At-Tabarani  and Ibn Abd Al-Barr  on the authority  of Abu  
Ad-Darda'  that) The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "No doubt,  
the wholesale  death  of (all members  of) a tribe is much  easier  than the death  of a 
man endued  with knowledge."
(It is unanimously  narrated  by more than one on the authority  of Abu  
Hurairah  that) The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "The people  
are of different  metals  like gold and silver  (in relation  to their  manners):  the good  
among  them in the pre-Islamic  period  of ignorance  is also good among  them in 
Islam,  particularly  when  they are given  the faculty  of religious  understanding."
(It is narrated  by Ibn Abd Al-Barr  on the authority  of Abu Ad-Darda'  that)  
The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "On the Day of Judgement,  
the ink of learned  men (therewith  they record  knowledge)  will be weighed  (in 
value)  with the blood  of martyrs  (which  they shed in Allah's  Way)."
(It is narrated  by Ibn Abd Al-Barr  on the authority  of Ibn Umar that) The  
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  him" said: "He, who preserves  (even)  forty  
Prophetic  traditions  of the Sunnah  for my nation  until he conveys  them,  I will act 
as intercessor  for him, and witness  to his (good deeds)
Judgement."
(It is narrated  by Ibn Abd Al-Barr  on the authority  of Anas that) The  
Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "He, from  among  my nation,  who  
keeps (by heart and acts upon even) forty Prophetic  traditions,  will meet Allah  
Almighty  on the Day of Judgement,  having  the rank of religious  jurists and 
learned  men."
(It is narrated  by Al-Khatib  on the authority  of Abdullah  Ibn Juz' Az-Zubaidi  
that) The Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "He,  who becomes  well-  
acquainted  in the religion  of Allah  Almighty,  Allah  Almighty  suffices  him against  
what concerns  him, and provides  him with sustenance  from sources  which  he 
expects  not."
(It is narrated  by Ibn Abd Al-Barr  that) The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be 
upon him" said: "Allah  Almighty  revealed  to Abraham:  'O Abraham!  I'm full of 
knowledge;  and I love such (of men)  as endued  with knowledge."
(It is narrated  by Ibn Abd Al-Barr  on the authority  of Mu'adh  that) The  
Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "No doubt,  the learned  one is the12
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
<
<
s
5
.
J
\
;
;
;
;
\
I
I
5
J
>
\ the Day of on
>
5
>
i
*
$
*
i
$
>
>
>
>
i


Page 15:
Book  One: Knowledge  --------------
trustees  of Allah  Almighty  on earth."
(It is narrated  by Ibn Abd Al-Barr  and Abu Na'im  on the authority  of Ibn 
Abbas  that) The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "There  are two 
types of persons  among  my nadon;  and if they are right, the people  would  
become  right, and if they are errant  the people  would  be errant:  the rulers and 
religious  jurists."
(It is narrated  by At-Tabarani,  Ibn Abd Al-Barr  and Abu Na'im on the 
authority  of A'ishah  that) The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  him" said: "If 
a day comes  upon  me, on which  I've not increased  in knowledge  which  brings  me 
much  closer  to Allah  Almighty,  let not me be blessed  in the sunrise  of that day."
(It is narrated  by At-Tirmidhi  on the authority  of Abu Umamah  that) The 
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said, in reference  to the preference  
given  to the learned  men over the worshipper  and martyr:  "The superiority  of 
a learned  man to a worshipper  is like the superiority  I have to the lowest  of 
my companions."  Consider  here how he places  knowledge  in the same  rank of 
Prophethood,  and how he lowers  the standing  of service  with no knowledge,  
even though  a worshipper  has knowledge  of the type of service  which  he does  
regularly,  otherwise,  by Allah,  it will, by no means  be considered  as worship  at13
all.
(It is narrated  by Abu Dawud,  At-Tirmidhi,  An-Nasa'i  and Ibn Hibban  on the 
authority  of Abu Ad-Darda'  that) The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  him"  
said: "The  superiority  of a learned  man to a worshipper  is like the superiority  of a 
full moon  (in its evident  shine  and closeness  to the earth)  to the other  planets  (in 
their  darkness  and farness  from the earth)."
(It is narrated  by Ibn Majah  on the authority  of Uthman  Ibn Affan  that) The 
Messenger  of Allah  " Peace  be upon  him" said: "On the Day of Judgement,  there  
will be three types of intercessors:  the Prophets,  then the learned  men,  and then  
the martyrs."  How  excellent  such a degree  (as given  to the learned  men) is which  
ranks  second  to Prophethood,  and prior  to martyrdom,  putting  in mind  the great  
superiority  of martyrdom!
(It is narrated  by At-Tabarani  and Abu Na'im on the authority  of Abu  
Hurairah,  and by At-Tirmidhi  and Ibn Majah  on the authority  of Ibn Abbas  that)  
The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "Nothing  is better than  
learning  in religion  therewith  Allah  Almighty  is worshipped;  and of a surety,  an 
individual  religious  jurist is much harder upon Satan than one thousand  
worshippers.  No doubt,  everything  has a supporting  pillar  (on which  it depends),  
and jurisprudence  is the supporting  pillar  of this religion."
(It is narrated  by Ibn Abd Al-Barr  on the authority  of Anas that) The  
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "The best of your religion  is the 
easiest  of its (matters  as long  as it does not make  lawful  what  is unlawful);  and the 
best of service  is the religious  learning."
(It is narrated  by Ibn Adi on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that) The  
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "A learned  faithful  believer  has 
been  given  seventy  degrees  superior  to the only worshipping  believer."


Page 16:
*
t\The quarter  of the acts of worship
(It is narrated  by At-Tabarani  on the authority  of Hizam  Ibn Hakim  that) The  
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "You've  come to live in a time,  
characterized  by abundance  of religious  jurists,  and shortage  of reciters  (of the 
Qur'an)  and lecturers,  shortage  of beggars,  and abundance  of givers (of wealth),  
in which  sendee  is much  better  than knowledge;  and a time will come  upon the 
people,  in which  there will be shortage  of religious  jurists,  and abundance  of 
lecturers,  shortage  of givers  and abundance  of beggars,  and knowledge  will be 
much  better  than sendee."
(It is narrated  by Al-Asbahani  on the authority  of Ibn Umar  from his father  
that) The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  him" said: " A learned  
hundred  degrees  higher  than a worshipper,  between  each two of which  there  is a 
(distance  as long as a) seventy-year  journey  covered  by a lean horse  running  
quick  pace."
(It is narrated  by Ibn Abd Al-Barr  on the authority  of Anas  that) it was said to 
The Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him":  "O Messenger  of Allah!  Which  of 
deeds  is the best (in the Sight  of Allah)?"  The Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  
him" said: "To have knowledge  of Allah Almighty."  It was said: "Which  
knowledge  do you mean?"  The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said:  
"The  knowledge  of Allah  Almighty."  It was said: "O Messenger  of Allah!  We ask 
you about  the deed, and you give an answer  pertaining  to knowledge."  On that 
The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "A few (and even trivial)  
deeds  could  be of great  benefit  if one has proper  knowledge  of Allah  Almighty,  
even  though  many  deeds  would  be of no benefit  if one is ignorant  of Allah."
(It is narrated  by At-Tabarani  on the authority  of Abu Musa that) The  
Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "On the Day of Judgement,  Allah  
Almighty  will raise the worshipping  servants  and then He will raise the learned  
men, and say: "O assembly  of learned  men! I have not provided  you with My 
Knowledge  but because  I have full recognition  of you; and I've never  given  you 
My Knowledge  in order  to punish  you: go: I've forgiven  for you."
We ask Allah  Almighty  for the good  end (of our journey).
As for the traditions,  a mention  might  be made  of the following:
Ali Ibn Abu Talib  "Allah  be pleased  with him" said to Kumail:  "O Kumail!  (It 
should  be known  that) knowledge  is better  than wealth:  it is knowledge  which  
safeguards  you (from  ignorance)  and it is you who safeguard  the wealth  (from  
others);  and knowledge  always  rules (by its principles)  and wealth  is ruled (by 
such principles  of knowledge);  and spending  always decreases  wealth  
though  spending  promotes  knowledge."
Ali Ibn Abu Talib "Allah  be pleased  with him" also said: "No doubt,  the 
learned  one is much better than the fasting  person,  who stands (at night for 
supererogatory  prayers)  and practices  Jihad  (in Allah's  Way);  and if a learned  
dies, his death  causes  a gap to happen  in Islam,  which  could  not be filled  up but 
by a successor  to him."
Ali Ibn Abu Talib "Allah  be pleased  with him" said in the form of poetic  
verses: Let the men of knowledge  be proud  of being  the guides  for anyone14
*
*
*
*
man is one
*at a
*
*
<
;
i
\
x
\
'
\
\
%
5
*
*
*
$
*even
man
•>
>
>
>
>


Page 17:
Book  One:  Knowledge  
who seeks the right guidance.  Everyone  is estimated  by what he is able to do 
perfectly,  since the ignorant  are always  the traditional  enemies  of the learned  
men. So, acquire  knowledge  therewith  you could  live lastingly  since the people  
will die, but the men of knowledge  will live forever  (with their beneficial  
knowledge)."
Abu Al-Aswad  said: "Nothing  is dearer  than knowledge:  it is true that the 
kings  rule over  the people,  the learned  men rule over the kings."
Ibn Abbas  "Allah  be pleased  with him" said: "fThe  Prophet)  Solomon,  son of 
(the Prophet)  David  "Peace  be upon both" was given the freedom  to choose  
knowledge,  wealth  or kingdom,  thereupon  he chose  knowledge,  with which  he 
was given  both  wealth  and kingdom  besides."
Ibn Al-Mubarak  was asked:  "Who  are the (real) people?"  he said: "The  learned  
men." He was further  asked:  "Then,  who are the kings?"  he said: "Those  who  
abstain  (from  this world)."  He was asked  (for the third time):  "Who  are the lowly  
among  the people?"  he said: "Those  who devour  the world  with the religion."  He 
seemed  to have ascribed  only the learned  men from amongst  all to the people  
because  it is knowledge  which  constitutes  the distinctive  characteristic  of man  
that distinguishes  him from the animal:  man is considered  to be a man only  
because  of the very thing for which  he is honoured.  This is not achieved  by the 
strength  of his body,  since the camel  (for example)  is much stronger  than him,  
nor is it by his hugeness,  since  the elephant  is more  huge  than him, nor is it by his 
bravery,  since the wild animal  is braver  than him, nor is it by his capability  of 
eating,  since the ox's abdomen  is larger  than his, nor is it by his power  of having  
sexual  intercourse,  since the lowest  from among  the birds are more powerful  to 
do so. Nay! Man has not been  created  but for knowledge.
One of the learned  men said in this respect:  "How  distressing  it is! Which  
thing  could  one catch  when  knowledge  has escaped  him? And which  thing  could  
one miss when  he has caught  knowledge?"
It is narrated  by 30 that The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said:  
"When  one is given  (the faculty  of keeping  by heart  and understanding  and acting  
upon) the Holy Qur'an,  even though  he feels that anyone  else has been given  
something  better than that, he will have disdained  what Allah Almighty  has 
honoured."
Fath Al-Mawsili  "Allah's  Mercy  be upon  him" said: "Is it not that if food and 
drink are forbidden  to a sick person,  he will die?" they answered  in the 
affirmative,  thereupon  he said: "So is the case of mind:  if knowledge  and wisdom  
are forbidden  to it for three  days,  it will die."
No doubt, he has told the truth. As well as food nourishes  the body,  
knowledge  and wisdom  nourish  mind, with which it lives; and if one looses  
knowledge,  his mind will grow ill, and its death should  inevitably  come,  even  
though  he feels not, since  his love and desire  for world,  by which  he is occupied,  
makes  his sense cease to function,  in the same way as the overwhelming  fear 
hinders  the sense  of injury  pain at once,  even though  it does not remove  it. But,  
when  the moment  of death  comes  to take away from him the burdens  of life, he15


Page 18:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
feels he will be ruined,  which  causes  him to regret  in sigh (for what  he has done),  
though  it will avail  him not. His sense  is like the sense  of fear which  the safe 
one entertains,  or the sense  of the injury  pain which  one might  come  to feel after  
the state of intoxication  is over.  We seek refuge  with  Allah  from  the day of lifting  
the veil for indeed,  the people  are always  in a state of sleep,  from  which  they do 
not wake  up and become  attentive  but at the moment  of death.
Al-Hassan  "Allah's  Mercy  be upon  him" said: "(On the Day of Judgement)  the 
ink of the learned  men (therewith  they record  knowledge)  will be weighed  (in 
value)  with the blood  of martyrs,  and the ink of the learned  men will overweigh  
the blood  of martyrs."
Ibn Mas'ud  "Allah  be pleased  with him" said: "I advise  you to stick to 
knowledge  before  it is taken  away,  by the death  of its transmitters.  By Him in 
Whose  Hand  is my soul! Some  men who were killed  in Allah's  Way as martyrs  
wish that Allah  Almighty  would  raise them from dead once again,  as learned  
men (in this world)  because  of the dignity  they see given to those (learned  
men). To be sure, none was born as a knowledgeable,  but knowledge  is 
acquired  by learning."
Ibn Abbas  "Allah  be pleased  with him" said: "To study  a branch  of knowledge  
for a portion  of a night  is dearer  to me than to give life to it (the whole  night  by 
standing  for supererogatory  prayers)."  This statement  is also transmitted  on the 
authority  of Abu Hurairah  and Ahmad  Ibn Hanbal.
In comment  on Allah's  statement:  "Our Lord! Give us good in this world  
and good in the Hereafter,  and defend  us from the torment  of the Fire" (Al- 
Baqarah  201)* 16
*even
*
*
*
*
*
%
*
<
*
*
<
*
i
;
:
ii (5s>  jilii o lai vij 5>S m $ din j lii; T2j >
"The good  in this world  stands  for religious  knowledge  and service,  and the 
good  in the hereafter  stands  for the Garden."
It is said to one of the learned  men: "Which  things  would  you like to keep  
(with you)?"  he said: "Those  things  which  should  swim with you (to save you 
from sinking)  once your ship sinks."  Those  things  refer to knowledge,  and the 
sinking  of the ship refers  to the destruction  of body  (by death).
It is said by one of the people:  "He, who takes wisdom  as rein (on his 
journey),  the people  should  take him as leader; and he, who is famous  for 
knowledge,  the eyes should  look  forward  to him with great  respect."
Ash-Shafi  i Allah  s Mercy  be upon him" said: "It is a great honour  for 
knowledge  that if anyone  is ascribed  to it, no matter  insignificant  it might  be, he 
will be pleased,  and if it is taken  away  from  him, he will grow  sad."
Umar Allah be pleased  with him" said: "O people!  I advise  you to stick to 
knowledge  for Allah  Almighty  has a garment  which  He loves,  and whoever  seeks  
for any branch  of knowledge,  he will be dressed  by Allah Almighty  in this 
garment,  and if he commits  a sin, he will be asked  to turn in repentance  thrice,  in 
order  not to deprive  him of that garment;  even though  he insists  on committing  
that sin until he dies."
Al-Ahnaf  Allah  s Mercy  be upon  him" said: "The learned  men are about  to;
>
i
?
i
i
:
5
V
i
i
J
5
3
*
>


Page 19:
Book  One: Knowledge  
become  chiefs;  and every power  that is not supported  by knowledge  should  
inevitably  be put to humiliation."
Salim  Ibn Abu  Al-Ja'd  said: "My master  bought  me by three  Dirhams  and then  
he emancipated  me. I said (to myself):  ’Which  thing  should  I take as profession?'  
I took  knowledge  as my profession,  and it was not after the end of the same  year  
that the governor  of Medina  came  to visit me, but I did not admit  him."
Az-Zubair  Ibn Abu Bakr said: The following  was written  (and sent in a letter)  
to my father  in Iraq: "You should  stick to knowledge  for if you become  poor,  it 
will act for you as (instrument  therewith  you could get) wealth,  and if you 
become  rich, it will act for you as (garment  of) beauty."
According  to the commandments  of Luqman  to his son: "O my son! Sit with  
the learned  men, and compete  with them (in learning),  for Allah  Almighty  gives  
life to minds  with the help of the light of wisdom,  in the same way as He gives  
life to earth  with the help of the rain which  comes  down  from  the sky."
A wise man said: "When  a learned  man dies, (everything,  including  even) the 
whale  in the sea and the bird in the air will weep on him; and although  his face 
will be lost (by his disappearance  from the eyes),  his commemoration  will not be 
forgotten."
Az-Zuhri  "Allah's  Mercy  be upon  him" said: "No doubt,  knowledge  is male (in 
its power  and strength),  and it is the male  from  among  men  who love it."
The Virtue  Of Learning
From  amongst  its proofs,  a mention  might  be made  of the following:  " if a 
contingent  from every expedition  remained  behind,  they could devote  
themselves  to studies  in religion,  and admonish  the people  when  they return  
to them, that thus they (may learn) to guard themselves  (against  evil)." (At- 
Tawbah  122)17
ili]  ^>3  <4 ipr?  ^ $
"If you know  this not, ask of those  who possess  the Message."  (An-Nahl  43 
and Al-Anbiya  7)
o!jT  jit i } - i (0) bo!  jjlt jit ijilzj ^ <0
A mention  might  be made  also of the following  Prophetic  sayings:
It is narrated  by Muslim  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that) The  
Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "He,  who follows  a way therewith  
he seeks knowledge,  Allah  Almighty  will cause  him to follow  a way direct  to the 
Garden."
(It is narrated  by Ahmad  on the authority  of Safwan  Ibn Assal that) The  
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "No doubt,  the angels  lower  (or 
spread according  to another  interpretation)  their wings (in humility)  for the 
learner  out of their  leisure  with  what  he does."
(It is narrated  by Ibn Abd Al-Barr  on the authority  of Abu Dharr  that) The  
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "To go early in the morning  to


Page 20:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
one18
learn even a chapter  of knowledge  is much better for you than to pray  
hundred  rak'ahs."
(It is narrated  by Ibn Abd Al-Barr  on the authority  of Al-Hassan,  and At- 
Tabarani  on the authority  of Abu Dharr  that) The Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be 
upon  him" said: "Even  a chapter  of knowledge  which  a man learns  is much  better  
for him than the whole  world  and what  it contains."
(It is narrated  by Ibn Adi and Al-Baihaqi  on the authority  of Anas that) The  
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "Seek after knowledge  even  
though  it is (to take you as far as) to China."
The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  him" said: "Seeking  after knowledge  
is an obligation  due upon every Muslim."  (It is narrated  by Abu Na'im  on the 
authority  of Ali tracing  it up to) The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him"  
that he said: "Knowledge  is of many treasures,  whose  keys are to ask for it. 
Behold!  You should  ask (for what you know not) for four (types of persons)  
would receive  reward  for that: the questioner,  the learned  man (who gives  
answers),  the listener,  and their  lover."
(It is narrated  by At-Tabarani,  Ibn Mardawaih  and Abu Na'im  on the authority  
of Jabir  that) The Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "It is not fitting  
for an ignorant  to keep silent  (and refrain  from  removing)  his ignorance;  and it is 
not fitting  for a learned  man to keep silent (and refrain  from benefiting  others  
with)  his knowledge."
It is narrated  on the authority  of Abu Dharr  that The Messenger  of Allah  
"Peace  be upon him" said: "To attend  even a session  of a learned  men is much  
better  than to pray one thousand  rak'ah,  to visit one thousand  patients  (in order  
to enquire  about their health) and also to follow one thousand  funeral  
processions."  It was said: "O Messenger  of Allah! (Is it better)  also than reciting  
the Qur'an?"  The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "Should  the 
Qur'an  avail anyone  in absence  of knowledge?"
(It is narrated  by Ad-Darimi  on the authority  of Al-Hassan  that) The  
Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "If death  approaches  anyone  while  
seeking  after knowledge,  (he will have a lofty rank so high that) there  will remain  
only a single  degree  in the Garden  between  him and the Prophets."
As for the traditions  pertaining  to that, it is narrated  that Ibn Abbas  "Allah  be 
pleased  with him" said: "I lowered  myself  when  I was student  (of knowledge),  
and I was honoured  when I came to be (teacher)  sought  for (by others)."  Ibn 
Abu Mulaikah  said about  him: "I've never  seen the like of Ibn Abbas:  when  I 
him, I see The most  good-looking  among  men; when  he speak,  he proves  to be 
the most  eloquent  among  men;  and when  he gives religious  verdicts,  he proves  to 
have  the best knowledge  among  men."
Ibn Al-Mubarak  said: "I wonder  how he whosee
never seeks after knowledge  
should  do any good  deed! A wise man said: "I have no petty  to anyone  as I have  
to two (types  oQ men: one seeks  after knowledge,  even though  he does not have  
the faculty  of understanding,  and 
knowledge,  even  though  he does not seek after  it."who has the faculty  of understanding one


Page 21:
Book  One:  Knowledge
Abu Ad-Darda'  "Allah  be pleased  with him" said: "To learn even a single  
question  is much dearer to me than to stand for a whole night (to offer  
supererogatory  prayer)."  He further  said: "Be either a tutor or a learner,  or a 
listener  (to knowledge),  but beware  of being  the fourth  one (i.e. an ignorant),  lest 
you would  be ruined."
Ata' said: "A single  session  of knowledge  prevails  over seventy  gatherings  of 
entertainment."  Umar  "Allah  be pleased  with him" said: "The death  of even one 
thousand  worshippers,  who stand at night (for supererogatory  prayer) and 
observe  fasts during  the day is much  easier  than the death  of a single  one endued  
with knowledge,  who is well-acquainted  with what is made lawful  and what is 
made  unlawful  by Allah  Almighty."
Ash-Shafi'i  said: "To seek after knowledge  is much  better  than to perform  a 
voluntary  service."  Ibn Abd Al-Malik  said: "I was with Malik  (Ibn Anas)  reciting  
(pordons  of) knowledge  to him when  the due time of Zhuhr  prayer  came (upon  
us), thereupon  I gathered  the books  in order  to offer  prayer.  On that he said: "O 
man! By no means  is that (prayer)  to which  you've  stood (to offer) better  than  
that (state of studying  knowledge)  in which  you were, on the condition  that the 
intention  should  be right."
Abu Ad-Darda'  said: "He, who thinks  that going  early  in the morning  with the 
intention  to acquire  knowledge  is not (an item of) Jihad,  is indeed  lacking  in both  
his thought  and mind."19
The Virtue  Of Teaching
A mention  might  be made  of the following  supporting  proofs  from the Holy  
Qur'an:  " and admonish  the people  when  they  return  to them,  that thus they (may  
learn)  to guard  themselves  (against  evil)."  (At-Tawbah  122)
i ©5 tej A 13}
What  is intended  here is teaching  and instructing.  Allah  Almighty  further  says:  
"And  remember  Allah  took a Covenant  from the People  of the Book,  to make  it 
known  and clear  to mankind,  and not to hide it." (A1 Imran  187)
i (jgj Vj ^ilu  iji tf.ii  jiL ST oil "iij»
This means  that teaching  is obligatory.  Allah  Almighty  also says: "but some  of 
them  conceal  the truth  which  they themselves  know."  (Al-Baqarah  146)
This affirms  the prohibition  of concealing  the knowledge.  This is also  
supported  by Allah's  saying  in the same Surah:  "Conceal  not evidence;  for 
whoever  conceals  it, his heart  is tainted  with sin. And Allah knows  all that
you do." (283)
i :;I-2  ^ 0 LL, SiTj \i£  pv. Titji J., \±£S\ % »
(It is narrated  by Abu Na'im on the authority  of Ibn Mas'ud  that) The  
Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "Never  does Allah  provide  a man  
of knowledge  with (any branch  of portion  of) knowledge  but that He takes from


Page 22:
The quarter  of the acts of worship20
him die same  covenant  He takes from  the Prophets  to show  it to the people,  and 
conceal  it not."
Allah Almighty  also says in this respect:  " Who is better  in speech  than  
who calls (men)  to Allah,  works  righteousness,  and says, "I am of those  who bow  
in Islam?""  (Fussilat  33)one
J,\ Jlij & jj Tm Cr4 V? cr^ 1 o*3 >4
He says: "Invite  (all) to the Way of your Lord with wisdom  and beautiful  
preaching;  and argue  with them  in ways that are best and most  gracious.  (An-  
Nahl 125)
i ^SG-L,  dX/) cU- Jj £>• >
He also says: "and to instruct  them in Scripture  and Wisdom."  (Al-Baqarah  
129&151;  A1 Imran  164; Al-Jumu'ah  2)
^ j lulj ppOi  ^ ‘4 £25 4.1
As to the Prophetic  sayings,  a mention  might  be made  of the following:
(It is narrated  by Ahmad  and both sheikhs  that) The Messenger  of Allah  
"Peace  be upon  him" said to Mu'adh  (Ibn  Jabal)  when  he sent him to Yemen:  "If 
Allah  guides  through  you even a man is better  for you than (to have) this world  
and what  it contains."
(It is narrated  by Ad-Dailami  on the authority  of Ibn Mas'ud  that) The  
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "If a man learns a chapter  of 
knowledge  in order  to teach it to the people,  Allah Almighty  will give him the 
reward  of as many  as seventy  truly faithful  believers."
Jesus "Peace  be upon  him" said: "He, who learns,  acts (upon  what he learns)  
and has knowledge  (of what he does) will be called a Great one among  the 
assembly  of angels  of the heavens."
(It is narrated  by Adh-Dhahabi  on the authority  of Ibn Abbas  that) The  
Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "When  it is the Day of Judgement,  
Allah  Almighty  will say to the worshippers  and those  who practiced  Jihad  (in His 
Way):  "Enter  the Garden!"  the men of knowledge  will say: "It is by virtue  of our 
knowledge  that they worshipped  (You)."  He will say: "You are, in My sight,  like 
some  of My angels:  intercede  (for whomever  you like) and your intercession  will 
be accepted."  They will intercede  and then enter the Garden."  This applies  to 
such of knowledge  as is thought  (to others)  and not to such of knowledge  as is 
not taught
(It is unanimously  narrated  on the authority  of Abdullah  Ibn Amr that) The  
Messenger  of Allah Peace  be upon him" said: "No doubt,  by no means  does  
Allah take away knowledge  form men after providing  them with it, but it 
(knowledge)  vanishes  by the death  of its men: the more  a man of knowledge  dies,  
the more  the portion  of knowledge  he has will vanish,  until there  remain  only the 
ignorant  chiefs,  who give verdicts  with no knowledge  whenever  they are asked,


Page 23:
Book  One:  Knowledge  —----------------------------------------------
with the result  that they will go astray  and mislead  (the people)."
(It is narrated  by Abu Dawud,  Ibn Majah,  At-Tirmidhi  and others on the 
authority  of Abu Hurairah  that) The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him"  
said: "He, who learns  a (portion  of) knowledge  which  he conceals,  on the Day of 
Judgement,  Allah  will rein him with a rein of fire."
(It is narrated  by At-Tabarani  on the authority  of Ibn Abbas that) The 
Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "What  a good  gift it is to be given,  
and what  a nice present  it is to be offered:  a statement  of wisdom  you hear,  retain  
(in memory  until)  you convey  to a Muslim  brother  of yours,  in which  you instruct  
him is equal  (in reward)  to one-year  service."
(It is narrated  by At-Tirmidhi  and Ibn Majah on the authority  of Abu  
Hurairah  that) The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  him" said: "The world  is 
cursed  with all of what  it contains  barring  the celebration  of Allah  Almighty  and 
His Devotees,  a tutor  or a learner."
(It is narrated  by At-Tirmidhi  on the authority  of Abu Umamah  that) The 
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  him" said: "Of a surety,  Allah  Almighty,  His 
angels,  the inhabitants  of His heaven  and earth,  including  even the ant in its hole  
and the whale  in the ocean,  invoke  for (Allah's)  prayer  and Blessing  upon one 
who instructs  the people  in good."
(It is narrated  by Ibn Abd Al-Barr  on the authority  of Muhammad  Ibn Al- 
Munkadir  and Abu Na'im on the authority  of Abdullah  Ibn Amr that) The  
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "A Muslim  never benefits  his 
Muslim  brother  with anything  much  better  than a good  narration  which  he hears  
and conveys  to him."
(It is narrated  by Ibn Al-Mubarak  on the authority  of Zaid Ibn Aslam  that)  
The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "A good statement  which  a 
faithful  believer  hears,  teaches  (to others)  and then acts upon  is much  better  for 
him than one-year  service."
(It is narrated  by Ibn Majah  on the authority  of Abdullah  Ibn Amr that) one 
day, The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" came out and found two 
gatherings,  the members  of one of which  were invoking  Allah  Almighty  in desire  
for His (Bounty  and Favour)  and the members  of the other were teaching  the 
people,  thereupon  he said: "As for those (of the first gathering),  they are asking  
Allah (to give them),  and He could  give them if He so likes or withhold  them if 
He so likes;  and for the (members  of the) others,  they are teaching  the people  and 
indeed,  I've been sent as a tutor."  He inclined  to them  and sat with them.
(It is unanimously  narrated  on the authority  of Abu Musa  that) The Messenger  
of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" "The  example  of the guidance  and knowledge  with  
which  Allah  Almighty  has sent me is like the example  of heavy  rain which  came  
down  on a (piece  of) land, of which  a spot absorbed  water  that caused  grass to 
grow  in it in abundance,  and another  spot withheld  water  (as in a well) therewith  
Allah  Almighty  has benefited  the people,  from which  they drank,  gave water  to 
others,  and cultivated  (their land), and the third portion  proved  barren,  which  
neither  withheld  water,  nor caused  plants  to grow."  The first example  is set forth  
here for one who gets benefit  from his knowledge,  and second  for one who21


Page 24:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
benefits  the others  with his knowledge,  and the third for one who is deprived  of22
it.
(It is narrated  by Muslim  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that) The  
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  him" said: "If a son of Adam  dies, his deed  
will cease (to receive  reward)  barring  three: a (kind of) knowledge  from which  
others  get benefit. ..."
(It is narrated  by At-Tirmidhi  on the authority  of Anas that) The Messenger  of 
Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "The  guide  to good  is like its doer (in the reward  
he receives)."
(It is unanimously  narrated  on the authority  of Ibn Mas'ud that) The  
Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "There  is no envy (to be accepted)
whom Allah Almighty  has given wisdom  (and but in two things: a man  
knowledge)  therewith  he judges  among  the people  (with truth and justice),  and a 
man whom  Allah  has given  wealth,  and directed  to spend  it in good."
(It is narrated  by Ibn Abd Al-Barr  on the authority  of Al-Hassan  that) The  
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "Allah's  Mercy  be upon my 
successors!"  it was said: "Who are your (real) successors?"  he said: "They  are 
those  who give life to my sunnah  and instruct  the servants  of Allah  in it."
As for the traditions,  it is narrated  that Umar  said: "He,  who relates  a narration  
(to anyone)  upon which  he (the latter) acts, will have the like of the reward  of 
him,  who acts upon  it."
Ibn Abbas  said: "Everything  (in the worlds)  including  even the whale  in the 
ocean  asks for (Allah's)  Forgiveness  for one who instructs  the people  in good."
A learned  man said: "The man of knowledge  interferes  (with his knowledge  
with  which  he is endued)  between  Allah  and His Creatures:  let him then consider  
how  he should  interfere!"
It is narrated  that Sufyan  Ath-Thawri  entered  Asqalan  and stayed there (as 
long as Allah  wished  during  which)  none asked  him about  anything.  On that he 
said: "Hire (a riding mount)  for me so that I should set out of this town:  
however,  this is a town  wherein  knowledge  dies." He seemed  to have said so out 
of his keenness  on the virtue  of teaching  therewith  knowledge  abides.
It is narrated  that Ata' said: I visited Sa'id Ibn Al-Musayyab  and he 
weeping.  I asked  him: "What  does cause  you to weep?"  he said: "None  asks  
about  anything  (of knowledge)."
A learned  man said: "No doubt,  the man of knowledge  act as the lights  of the 
time, each of whom  acts as the lamp of his 
inhabitants  of his age seek light (and guidance)."
Al-Hassan  said: "Had it not been for thewas
me
with the help of which  the era.
man of knowledge  (who teach  
others)  the people  would  have  been  like beasts."  This means  that with the help of 
teaching  and instructing  (the people  in knowledge),  they take the people  out of 
the limit  of beastliness  to that of humanism.
It is narrated  that Ikrimah  said: 'Of a surety, there is a price for this 
knowledge."  It was said: "What  is it?" he said: "It is to give it to one who is 
perfectly  able to have  it, and not to waste  it."
It is narrated  that Yahya  Ibn Mu adh said: "The men of knowledge  are more


Page 25:
Book  One: Knowledge  
merciful  to the (members  of the) nation  of Muhammad  than their parents  are." It 
was said: "How  is that?"  he said: "That's  for the parents  safeguard  them  from  the 
fire of this world,  but the men of knowledge  safeguard  them from the fire of the 
hereafter."
It is said that the first step towards  knowledge  is to keep silent (while  it is 
delivered),  then to listen to it, then to keep it, then to act upon  it, and lasdy to 
make  it public  (in circulation  among  the people).
It is also said: "Teach  your knowledge  to him who is ignorant,  and learn from  
him who knows  what  you know  not: if you do so, you will surely  come  to know  
what  you knew  not, and keep by heart  what  you have  learnt."
(It is narrated  by Ibn Hibban  and Ibn Abd Al-Barr  that) Mu'adh  Ibn Jabal  said 
pertaining  to learning  and teaching  knowledge:  "Acquire  knowledge  for indeed  
learning  is out of Allah's  Fearingness,  seeking  after  it is out of service,  studying  it 
is out of Exaltadon  (of Allah),  searching  for it is out of Jihad,  teaching  it to one 
who is ignorant  is out of charity,  giving  it to its proper  men is out of approach  
(towards  Allah  Almighty):  It (knowledge)  is the entertainer  when  one is alone,  the 
companion  when one is in seclusion,  the right guide to the religion,  the one 
which  helps one keep padent  on both prosperity  and adversity,  the consultant  
among  the friends,  and the reladve  which  unites  the strange  ones. It is also the 
lighdng  guide of the way to the Garden,  therewith  Allah Almighty  raises up a 
people,  and make them take the positions  of leaders  and chiefs in goodness,  
guides  to be followed  by others,  and drivers  towards  good, to be traced  and 
observed  for their deeds.  The angels  have desire  for their companionship,  and 
their  wings  they touch  them (out of respect),  and everything,  be it living  or solid,  
including  even the whale  and animals  in the ocean,  the wild and domestic  animals  
of the land and the heaven  with its stars ask for (Allah's)  Forgiveness  for them."
That's because  knowledge  is the sight of minds which saves them from  
blindness,  and the light of eyes which  keeps  them from darkness,  and the power  
of bodies  which  protects  them from weakness,  with which  a servant  (of Allah)  
attains  the ranks of the pious and the highest  degrees  of the righteous  ones.  To 
consider  knowledge  is equal  to observe  fast, and to study  it is equal  to stand (at 
night for supererogatory  prayer).  With the help if it, Allah Almighty  is obeyed,  
worshipped  and regarded  as One and Only, glorified,  and invoked  (by Flis 
servants);  and with the help of it also good  relations  with kith and kin are kept,  as 
well as what  is lawful  and what  is unlawful  are known  distinctively.  It is a leader  
to be followed  by the deed. It is only the happy  (among  the people)  who are 
inspired  it, and it is only the wretched  (among  them)  who are deprived  of it: we 
ask Allah  to help us achieve  success  as far as the intellectual  proofs  pertaining  to 
that are concerned.
It should  be known  that the main point here in this chapter  is to know  the 
excellence  and value of knowledge,  and as long as such excellence  is not 
understood  in itself  and as long  as what  is intended  by it is not realized,  it will not 
be known  as existing  characteristic  for knowledge  or anything  else. He has gone  
astray  (from the truth) who covets  to know  whether  so and so is a wise man,23


Page 26:
- The quarter  of the acts of worship  
means.24
though  he does  not know  what  wisdom  really
However,  the superiority  is derived  from what  is superior  and surplus:  if two 
things  share  in something,  and one of them  has more  of it than the other,  it will 
be said that it is superior  to or it has superiority  over  it, whatever  that more  might  
be as much  as it is a part of the completion  of this thing.
It is said (for example)  that the horse  is superior  to the donkey  in the sense  
that it shares  with it the power  of carrying,  but it excels it in the power  of 
attacking  and retreating,  and the swiftness  of running,  and prettiness.  Suppose  
that a donkey  is more huge, it should  not be said that it is superior  for this 
increase  is surplus  in its appearance  even though  it is inessential,  and it is by 
means  a part of completion.  To be sure, the animal  is required  for both its 
characteristics  and essence,  and not only for its appearance.
Understood  that well, it is not ambiguous  to you to know  that knowledge  has 
superiority  to the other things  as well as the horse has superiority  to the other  
animals.  Moreover,  it is true that the power  of galloping  at a quick  pace is a good  
quality in particular  to the horse, even though  it is not absolute  quality;  
knowledge  is a good quality  in itself  as well as it is absolute  quality,  without  the 
restriction  of being  attributed  to anything  to be so: it is to describe  the Wholeness  
of Allah  Almighty,  and with it the angels  and Prophets  have been honoured.  It is 
known  that the intelligent  among  the horses  is much better than the stupid  
among  them;  and in this way,  it is an absolute  quality  without  the restriction  to be 
added  to anything  in order  to be so.
It should  be known  that the excellent  thing  which  is desired  for is divided  into 
what  is required  for itself,  what  is required  for anything  else, and what  is required  
for both itself  and anything  else. What  is required  for itself  is more honourable  
and much better than what is required  for anything  else. Both Dinars  and 
Dirhams  are from among  those required  for anything  else, without  which  they  
are (no more than) worthless  stones;  and had it not been for the fact that Allah  
Almighty  has made it easy to fulfill the needs through  them, they would  have  
become  equal  to pebbles.  From  among  the things  required  for itself  is happiness  
of the hereafter,  and the pleasure  of seeing  the Countenance  of Allah  Almighty.  
The soundness  of body  is from  amongst  those  required  for themselves  as well as 
for anything  else: the soundness  of one's leg, for example,  is required  (for itself)  
as to hold back  pain from  the body,  as well as it is required  for walking  therewith  
to achieve  the goals  and fulfill  the needs.
Having  regarded  that, if you consider  knowledge,  you will find it delightful  in 
itself,  and in this way, it is required  for itself;  and you will also find it a means  to 
the abode  of the hereafter  where  there is the permanent  happiness,  and a good  
come  closer  to Allah  Almighty,  without  which  He Almighty  could  not 
be reached.  Undoubtedly,  the everlasting  happiness  has the highest  rank in the 
sight  of mankind,  and the best thing  is that which  stands  for the means  to achieve  
it; and in no way could  it be reached  but through  both knowledge  and deed;  and 
the deed  could  not be achieved  but through  learning  of how this deed  is done.
Knowledge  is the origin  of happiness  in both the world  and the hereafter,  andeven
no
access  to


Page 27:
Book  One: Knowledge
in this way, it is the most honourable  deed, and why is it not so since the 
excellence  of a thing could be known  by the honour  of its fruit; and you know  
that the fruit of knowledge  in the hereafter  is to come  much  closer  to Allah  the 
Lord of the worlds,  join the horizon  of angels and approach  the supreme  
assembly  (in the heaven);  and in the world,  it is to have power  and honour,  
respect  and authority  of judgement  even over the kings. However,  sticking  to 
respect  is essential  to man's  character:  do you not see that even the stupid  among  
the Turks  and the harsh  among  the Arabs  always  have their natures  accustomed  
to show  great  respect  to their sheikhs  due to their knowledge  they acquire  from  
their experience?  Furthermore,  the animal  itself  is accustomed  in nature  to show  
respect  to the man, for it makes  sense to the fact that man is superior  to it in 
degree  and genre.
This is, indeed,  the absolute  superiority  of knowledge,  and after that, the 
disciplines  differ  in type and degree,  as we shall see later, and their excellence  
subsequendy  vary  in accordance  of their  difference.
As to the excellence  of teaching  and learning,  it is obvious  as shown  from  
what we have mentioned.  Since knowledge  is the best of matters,  learning  is 
to seek after the best of things,  and teaching  it is to benefit  (others  with) the 
best advantage.
This is clear from the fact that the objectives  of all creatures  are implied  in 
both religion  and world,  and there is no ordinance  to govern  the religion  other  
than that of this world.  Of a surety,  this world  acts as a farm to the hereafter.  It is 
the instrument  of conveyance  to (the Presence  of) Allah Almighty,  particularly  
for him who takes  it just as an instrument,  and it is an abode  for him who takes  it 
as residence  and homeland  (beyond  which  there  is nothing).
On the other  hand,  this world  could  be valid only by the works  and deeds  
of mankind,  and the works,  professions  and crafts of mankind  is of three25
types:
QThose  of) the first type are fundaments,  without  which  the world  could  not 
be well-established  (as it is), and they are four: agriculture  for saving food,  
weaving  for saving  clothes,  construction  for saving  residence,  and politics  which  
guarantees  life in a society  with co-operation  to keep up and adapt  the causes  of 
living.
The second  act as elementary  and preparatory  to each of those  industries,  like 
smithery,  which  serves  in agriculture  and a lot of industries,  through  making  the 
related  instrument,  and ginning  and spinning  which  pave the way for weaving.
The third act as complementary  and decorative  to the fundaments,  like 
grinding  and baking  in relation  to agriculture,  tailing  and embroidery  in relation  to
weaving,  etc.
Those  constitute  the substance  of this world,  likewise  the components  of the 
human,  which  are of three  types:  the fundaments  like the brain,  the heart  and the 
liver, the components  which serve them like the stomach,  veins, arteries  and 
nerves,  and components  which  are complementary  and decorative  to those  like 
the nails,  the fingers,  and both  eyebrows.


Page 28:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
The best and most  honourable  of those  industries  are the fundaments,  and the 
best and most honourable  of those fundaments  is the politics,  with its seeking  
towards  conciliation  and reform;  and it is for this reason  that this industry  in 
particular  necessitates  such of excellent  men who undertake  it as the other  
industries  might  not do. So, the politician  uses, to be able to achieve  his job, all 
the other  industries  with their  people.
In its tendency  to reform  the state of the people,  lead them to the right way  
which  saves  them  in the world,  and the hereafter,  the politics  is of four classes:
The first which  is the highest  comprises  the politics  of the Prophets,  and their  
judgement  applies  to the public  and private  of people  in both their outward  and 
inward.
The second  comprises  the (politics  of) caliphs,  kings, Sultans  (and rulers in 
general)  whose  judgement  applies  to the public  and private  of people,  but only as 
far as their  outward,  and not inward,  is concerned..
The third comprises  the men who have knowledge  of Allah  Almighty,  and 
His religion,  and it is those who are the heirs of the Prophets  (as far as 
knowledge  and wisdom  are concerned);  and their judgement  applies  to the 
inward  of the private,  since getting  benefit  form them  is beyond  the reach of 
the understanding  of the public  audience;  but they have no power  of authority  
to dispose  of their outward  as far as compulsion,  prevention  and legislation  
are concerned.
The fourth  comprises  the preachers  (who give admonition  to the people)  and 
their  judgement  applies  only to the inward  of the public  audience.
The most honourable  of those industries  after Prophethood  is to benefit  
others with the knowledge,  and educate the spirits to refrain from the 
blameworthy  destructive  manners,  and guide them to the praiseworthy  happy-  
causing  manners;  and this is what  is intended  by teaching  (knowledge).
We say that this is the most  honourable  of industries  and crafts  for the honour  
of an industry  is evidently  known  by three  things:
Either  by regarding  the faculty  through  which  it is known,  like the superiority  
of the intellectual  sciences  to the linguistic  ones,  since  the wisdom  is perceived  by 
the mind,  and the language  by (the faculty  of) hearing,  and of a surety,  the mind  is 
more  honourable  than hearing;  or by regarding  the general  advantage,  just as the 
superiority  of agriculture  to goldsmith;  or by remarking  the material  with which  it 
is done,  just as the superiority  of goldsmith  to tanning,  since the gold constitutes  
the material  of one of them  and the hide of the dead animal  is the material  of the 
other.26
It is not ambiguous  that the religious  sciences  which  
jurisprudence  of the way to the hereafter  are perceived  by the perfect  mind,  and 
the pure intelligence;  and the mind  is the most  honourable  of man's  qualities  as it 
shall be cleared  later: with it Allah's  Trust  is received,  and with it the Presence  of 
Allah  Almighty  is reached.
Nevertheless,  its general  advantage  is beyond  suspicion,  since its benefit  and 
fruit is to achieve  the happiness  of the hereafter.  The honour  of its material  is 
also clear,  since the tutor  disposes  of the hearts,  minds  and spirits  of the people.comprise  the


Page 29:
Book  One:  Knowledge  
To be sure, mankind  is the most  honourable  among  the inhabitants  of the earth,  
and his heart is the most honourable  of his components;  and the tutor is 
occupied  by educating,  polishing,  purifying  and driving  it to become  much  closer  
to the Presence  of Allah  Almighty.
Teaching  knowledge  then is, on one hand, an item of service  to Allah  
Almighty,  and on the other hand a kind of vicegerency  to Allah Almighty  (on 
earth);  and it is for the sake of this vicegerency  to Allah Almighty,  that He 
Almighty  has opened  the heart of the learned  man to knowledge,  the most  
essential  characteristic  of Him. In this way he (the man of knowledge)  is like a 
storekeeper  of the most valuable  treasure;  and he is permitted  to spend  from it 
on him who is in need of it. Which  rank then is more glorious  than that which  
makes  a servant  an intermediate  between  his Lord  Almighty  and His creatures,  so 
as to bring them much closer  to (the Presence  of) Allah  Almighty,  and driving  
them to the Garden  of Eternity?  Might  Allah Almighty  make us among  them  
with His Generosity;  and Allah's  Blessing  and Peace be upon every servant  
chosen  (by Allah).27
CHAPTER  TWO:  ON THE PRAISEWORTHY  AND  BLAMEWORTHY  
KNOWLEDGE:  THEIR  DIVISIONS  AND COMMANDMENTS
The Knowledge  Whose  Learning  Is An Obligatory  
Duty (Upon  Everyone)
It is narrated  that The Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "Seeking  
for knowledge  is an obligation  due upon every  Muslim."  It is also narrated  that 
The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "Seek  after knowledge  even  
though  it is to (take  you as far as to) China."
The people  differ  about  the science  that is obligatory  duty upon  every  Muslim,  
and they divide  into twenty  factions;  and we would  not like to offer lengthy  
details  about  that, but let's say, in brief, that every faction  makes  obligatory  the 
very science  which  it adopts:
The theologists,  for example,  argue that it is the scholastic  theology  (that is 
obligatory  duty) since it is with it Allah's  Oneness  is perceived,  and Allah's  
Quality  and Characteristics  are known.
The jurists  argue  that it is the science  of religious  jurisprudence,  since  with it 
the religious  services,  what is lawful  and what is unlawful  are known,  the legal  
treatments  are distinguished  from the illegal  ones;  and they mean,  by it, what the 
individuals  are in need  of apart  from  the seldom  events.
As to the exegetes  and narrators  of Hadith  argue  that it is the science  of both  
the Book (of the Qur'an)  and the sunnah  (of the Prophet)  since with that all 
branches  of knowledge  are accessible.
The Sufis argue  that it is that science  of Sufism  (which  is intended  here).  Some  
of them say that it is the servant's  knowledge  of his state, and his position  from  
Allah  Almighty.  Others  say that it is the knowledge  of fidelity  and the defects  of 
spirits,  in order to distinguish  the visitation  of the angel from that of Satan.  
Others  say that it is the knowledge  of the inward,  and thus, it is due only upon


Page 30:
— The quarter  of the acts of worship  
its real men;  and in this way, they divert28
confidential  people  in particular,  who are 
the term from  its general  meaning.
Abu Talib Al-Makki  says that it is the knowledge  of what is implied  in the 
narration  of the principles  of Islam,  in which  The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be 
him" said (on the authority  of Ibn Umar):  "Islam is based upon five 
principles:  to bear testimony  to the fact that there  is no god (to be worshipped)  
but Allah..."  that's because  those five principles  are obligatory  services,  and this 
have knowledge  of the way they are done perfectly  and how theyupon
necessitates  to
are obligato^.
The main point here, in which  there is no doubt,  is what we are going  to 
mention,  i.e. that the knowledge  is of two types, as we have said earlier  in the 
book's speech: die knowledge  of practical  religion,  and the knowledge  of 
Revelation;  and the knowledge  that is intended  here is that of practical  religion.  
The practical  religion  enjoined  upon every discerning  sane person  to do is of 
three divisions:  belief,  doing  (what  is lawful)  and refraining  from (doing  what is 
unlawful).
Once  a sane discerning  person  attains  the age of puberty,  as shown  from  
having  nocturnal  wet dreams  or from his teeth in the morning  of a day, for 
example,  the first obligation  due upon him is to learn and understand  the 
meaning  of the statement  of testimony,  i.e. the testimony  that "There  is no 
god (to be worshipped)  but Allah,  and that Muhammad  is the Messenger  of 
Allah."  It is not obligatory  for him to tty to verify of the reality of that 
through  consideration,  research  and bringing  about  proofs  to affirm  that: it is 
sufficient  for him just to have faith in it, with truth and firmness  in which  
there is no suspicion  nor hesitation.  This might  happen  only by hearing  and 
imitation,  with no (need  for) research  and bringing  about  proofs.  It is known  
that The Messenger  of AJlah "Peace  be upon him" regarded  as sufficient  to 
accept  from the harsh  Bedouins  only their trust and declaration  with no need  
to learn  a proof  for it.
Once  he does so, he has fulfilled  the obligation  due upon him as expected  at 
the time. The knowledge  that is obligator}'  duty upon him at that time is just to 
learn and understand  the meaning  of the testimony,  and nothing  beyond  that is 
compulsory  upon  him at that time. The evidence  for that is that if he dies a short  
while  after that, he will have  died in a state of obedience  and not disobedience  to 
Allah  Almighty.
But, it might  be obligatory  to do something  beyond  that, even though  it is 
inessential,  and henceforth,  it is not due upon every person:  those inessentials  
might  be in doing,  in refraining  (from  doing  what  is unlawful)  or in the belief.  As 
for doing,  it is that he might  live from the morning  up to noon,  thereupon  he is 
required  to learn how to get purified  and perform  ablution,  and how to offer  
prayer.  If he is healthy  enough  to keep living  until the sun passes  the meridian,  
without  being  able to learn  and do the deed  perfectly  on time,  and furthermore,  if 
he is occupied  by learning,  the due time would  beover, it then might  be said:  
'Since it is apparent  that he would  survive,  it is obligatory  upon him to learn


Page 31:
Book  One: Knowledge  
before  the due time';  and it also might  be said: 'The obligation  of learning  which  
is requisite  for doing  the deed perfectly  ranks second  to the obligation  of doing  
the deed;  and thus,  it might  not be obligatory  for him to learn before  the decline  
of the sun'; and this applies  to the remaining  (obligatory)  prayers.
If he is to live up to the coming  of (the month  of) Ramadan,  he is required,  
because  of that, to learn fasting:  i.e. that the period  within  which  it lies is from  
dawn  up to the rise of the sun, in which  it is obligatory  to have the intention  (to 
observe  fast) and refrain  from eating,  drinking  and having  sexual  relations,  and 
this should remain  until the new moon (of Shawwal)  is visible (whether  by 
oneself)  or by two witnesses.
If he gains or has got wealth  once he has attained  the age of puberty,  he is 
required  to learn that there is obligatory  charity  due upon him. But it is not 
necessary  for him to do that before  a whole  year elapses  as of the date of his 
(conversion  into) Islam: if he has got no property  other than camels,  he is 
required  to learn the obligatory  charity  due upon  him from  camels;  and so is the 
case in all categories.
If the months  of Hajj come  upon  him, it is not necessary  for him to hasten  to 
learn it, since its doing  is not urgent,  but the learned  men of Muslims  should  
draw  his attention  to the fact that performing  Hajj is binding  upon one who has 
got the necessary  provisions  and a riding  mount,  in case he has provisions  and a 
riding mount.  When he thinks he should  hasten  to perform  Hajj, then, if he 
decides  to perform  it, he is required  to learn  the way of performing  Hajj, and it is 
sufficient  for him to learn only its ceremonies  and duties,  with no necessity  for 
learning  its voluntary  and extra deeds,  since doing  them is voluntary  and thus  
learning  it is voluntary;  and in this way, its learning  is, by no means,  an obligatory  
duty (which  should  be due upon every Muslim).  But even, the prohibition  of 
keeping  silent from showing  the obligation  of performing  Hajj at once is 
questionable,  and its discussion  is fitting  for the religious  jurisprudence.  This  
gradation  applies  to the knowledge  of all the deeds  which  are obligatory  duties  
(due upon  every  Muslim).
As for the preventions,  he should  learn the knowledge  of that in accordance  
to the states  which  come  about,  and this varies  by the different  states  of men: a 
mute (for example)  is not required  such of speech  as is unlawful,  nor is a blond  
required  to learn such of sights  as is unlawful,  nor is a Bedouin  required  to learn  
such of places  as is unlawful  for him to sit in the dwellings;  since  this is obligatory  
according  to what  is needed.  It is not necessary  for him to learn  what  is known  to 
be far from him, unlike  what is concomitant  to him, to which his attention  
should  be drawn,  just as when  he is wearing  silk, or sitting  in what  is forbidden  or 
looking  at what is unlawful  at the time of his embracing  Islam: he should  be 
taught  (to avoid  it). On the other  hand,  as to what  is not concomitant  to him, but 
is about to befall him, he should  be taught  (to avoid it), such as eating  and 
drinking.  If he is in a town,  where  wine is drunk  and the flesh of swine  is eaten,  
he should  be taught  (to avoid  that); and to be sure, he is required  to learn what  
should  be taught.
As to beliefs and deeds of minds and hearts, he should  learn that in29


Page 32:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
accordance  with die different  thoughts  that come  about  in his mind:  if suspicion  
rouses  in him about  the meaning  of both statements  of testimony  (that there is 
god but Allah  and diat Muhammad  is the Messenger  of Allah),  he should,  at 
once, learn the proper  means therewith  to remove  this suspicion.  If such  
suspicion  does not befall him, and he dies before  having  the belief  that Allah  s 
Speech  is Ancient,  and that He Almighty  is Visible,  and by no means  could  He be 
vulnerable  to the events,  and the like of that which  is mentioned  in relation  to 
beliefs,  he will have died while  being  on Islam  according  to the unanimity  (of all 
the learned  men and jurists).
But some  of those  thoughts  which  result  in beliefs  come  about  by nature,  and 
some  by hearing  from  the inhabitants  of the town  (in which  one might  be). If one 
is in a town  in which  religious  innovated  heresies  are in circulation,  he should  be 
safeguarded  from that once he arrives,  by dictating  the truth to him, for if falsity  
is presented  to him, it becomes  necessary  to be removed  from his heart,  which  
might  be too difficult  to do, as if this Muslim  person  is a trader  in a town, in 
which  practicing  usury  is in circulation.  In this case, he is required  to learn  how to 
take care of usury.
This is the truth concerning  the knowledge  that is obligatory  duty (whose  
learning  is binding  upon every Muslim),  i.e. to have knowledge  of the way of 
doing  such of deeds  as is obligatory  to do. If one learns  the obligatory  knowledge  
and the due time of its obligation,  he will have learnt the knowledge  that is 
obligatory  duty (whose  learning  is binding  upon every Muslim).  What  the Sufis  
understand  in this respect  as the visitation  of the enemy  and the angel's  visitation  
is also true, but for him who undertakes  it.
If man could  hardly  be released  from  evil, showing  off, and envy,  he should  be 
required  to learn from the knowledge  of the quarter  of destructives  what he 
needs;  and why not since the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said 
(according  to the narration  of Al-Bazzar,  At-Tabarani,  Abu Na'im  and AI-Baihaqi  
on the authority  of Anas):  "There  are three destructives:  niggardliness  by which  
one abides,  an inclination  which  one follows,  and one's  over-confidence."
Almost  no human  being  could  be free from those  and such of characteristics  
as we shall mention  later, from  among  the evil states  of the heart,  like arrogance,  
haughtiness  and their fellows,  cater for those three destructives,  and removing  
them is an obligatory  deed (binding  upon everyone),  and they could not be 
removed  unless  their limits,  reasons,  signs and the ways of treatment  are clearly  
known.
To be sure, one who does not know  the evil (is about  to) fall into it; and the 
is to oppose  the reason  (of the defect)  with its opposite;  and how  
would  it be done  without  knowledge  of both the cause  and causer?
The most part of what is mentioned  in the quarter  of destructives  belong  to 
the obligatory  duties  (binding  upon everyone),  even though  most of the people  
have  left them  since  they  were  occupied  by things  which  are of no significance.
From  among  the things,  which  one should  not be hastily  prompted  to learn,  
unless  he has just been converted  from a religion  to another,  is the faith in the30
no
treatment


Page 33:
31 Book  One: Knowledge  
Garden  and the fire (of Hell),  and the mustering  and resurrection  (on the Day of 
Judgement)  so that his trust  in them  would  be affirmed.  Such (faith)  is integral  to 
the statement  of testimony.  After one affirms  his faith in the fact that he 
(Muhammad)  is Allah's  Messenger,  he should  understand  the significance  of his 
message  which  he conveyed  (to the people),  i.e. that he, who obeys  Allah  and His 
Messenger  will enter  the Garden,  and he who disobeys  them  will enter  the fire (of 
Hell).
Having  understood  that way of thinking,  you then shall have learnt  that this is 
the true way of life, and verified  of the fact that man, in the course  of his life, 
during  his night  and day, is always  vulnerable  to new thoughts  in the performance  
of his acts of service  and treatments,  which  impose  new obligations;  and this 
necessitates  him to ask about  what  befalls  him, as well as require  him to hasten  to 
learn  such  of things  as he expects  to happen  most  likely  in the near future.
If it is clear that the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" intends  by the 
knowledge  in his statement:  "Seeking  after the knowledge  is an obligatory  duty  
upon  every  Muslim"  is knowledge  with the definitive  article,  i.e. the knowledge  of 
the deed whose  doing  is obligatory  only upon the Muslims,  then, this way of 
thinking  and the due time in which  those  obligations  should  be done  will come  to 
be evident;  and Allah  Almighty  knows  better.
The Knowledge  Whose  Learning  Is A Collective  Duty
It should  be known  that an obligatory  science  could not be distinguishable  
from another  except  in relation  to the divisions  of knowledge.  As far as our 
subject  is concerned,  the sciences  are divided  into legal and non-legal.  By the legal  
sciences  it is meant  what has been taken and learnt from the Prophets  and 
Messengers  "Peace  be upon  them",  and they are not acquired  by reason,  as is the 
case of arithmetic  (for example),  nor by experimentation  as is the case of 
medicine,  nor by hearing,  as is the case of language.
As for the non-legal  sciences,  they are divided  into what  is praiseworthy,  what  
is blameworthy,  and what  is permissible.  The blameworthy  science  is that which  
deals  with the interests  and affairs  of this world  like medicine  and arithmetic;  and 
this (type  of sciences)  is divided  to that which  is collective  duty,  and that which  is 
meritorious,  even though  it is not obligatory.
As to the collective  duty, it is the science  which is indispensable  for the 
maintenance  of this world,  like medicine,  which  is necessary  for the preservation  
of bodies,  and arithmetic's,  which  is necessary  for treatments  and the distribution  
of bequests  and heritage;  and there are other  sciences  like those  which  have the 
same position.  If a town has none to undertake  them,  its people  will be put to 
critical  situation,  and if anyone  undertakes  them,  it will be sufficient,  and in this 
way, the obligation  will be cancelled  from  the others.
Thus,  let none  wonder  at our statement  that both medicine  and arithmetic's  
are among  the sciences  which are collective  duties,  since the fundamental  
industries  like farming,  weaving,  and politics.  Moreover,  cupping  also is a 
collective  duty, for it a town  has no cuppers,  destruction  will hasten  to befall


Page 34:
The quarter  of the acts of worship32
its people,  who will be put to critical  situation  by becoming  victims  of ruin.  
Of a surety,  He, who has created  the ailment,  has created  its medicine,  and 
guided  the people  to the way of using  it, and the causes  of having  it. For this 
reason,  it is impermissible  to cause  oneself  to be vulnerable  to destruction  by 
neglecting  such medicine.
But as to the study  of sophisticated  arithmetic's  and complicated  medicine,  it 
is meritorious,  and not obligatory,  since it is dispensable,  even though  it might  
benefit  in supporting  the needed  amount  of related  sciences.
As for such of sciences  as magic,  sorcery,  witchery,  and the like of that, they  
are among  the blameworthy  sciences.
As far as the permissible  science  is concerned,  a mention  might  be made of 
the science  of poetry,  which  has no wickedness  (or committing  what  is unlawful),  
in addition  to history,  and the like of them.
Nevertheless,  the legal sciences  about which we are talking are all 
praiseworthy.  But, what might be thought  to be legal, even though  it is 
blameworthy,  might  be mixed  with them.  Having  taken  that, they are divided  into  
what is praiseworthy,  and what is blameworthy.  The praiseworthy  among  them  
have fundaments,  branches,  preliminary  and concluding  sciences,  and they are of 
four types:
The first type constitutes  the fundaments,  and they are four: the Book  of 
Allah  Almighty  (i.e. the Holy Qur'an),  the sunnah  of the Messenger  of Allah  
"Peace  be upon him" (all the sayings,  deeds and acts of the Prophet),  the 
unanimity  of the nation,  and the traditions  of the holy companions  (of the 
Prophet).
The unanimity  of the nation  is one of the fundaments,  since  it highlights  (and  
explains)  the sunnah,  and from this point  of view,  it is the third fundament.  So 
are the traditions  of the companions,  since they indicate  to the sunnah,  for the 
holy companions  "Allah  be pleased  with them"  had (the honour  and privilege  to) 
witness  the Divine  Inspiration  (as being  revealed  upon the Prophet),  and saw,  
with the help of the enlightening  events,  what the others,  who came  after them,  
saw not; and of a surety,  no statements  could  be able to express  well what  is seen  
by the eyes. From  this perspective,  the learned  men follow  their steps and adhere  
to their traditions,  but with a special  condition  to be stipulated  by those who  
adopt  it; and it is not fitting  to explain  it in this context.
The second  type stands  for the branches,  which  constitute  what  have been  
understood  from the fundaments,  not according  to their wording  so much  as 
it is depending  upon  meanings,  to which  the intellects  made  sense,  because  of 
which  the understanding  extended  so much to include  what it might  not be 
really  intended  by the wording.  A mention  might  be made,  in this context,  of 
the statement  of the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" (on the 
authority  of Abu Bakrah):  "Let no judge  pass a judgement  while  he is in the 
state of anger" from which  it was understood  that he should  not pass a 
judgement  when  he is afraid,  hungry  or suffering  from  painful  ailment.  This is 
of two kinds:
The first kind is concerned  with the matters  and affairs  of this world,  and it is


Page 35:
Book  One:  Knowledge
implied  in the books  of religious  jurisprudence,  and it is the jurists,  the learned  
men of this world,  who undertake  it.
The other  is concerned  with the affairs  of the hereafter,  and it is divided  into 
the knowledge  of the different  states  and praiseworthy  and blameworthy  manners  
of the heart,  what  is pleasing  to Allah  Almighty,  and what  is undesirable;  and this 
science  is implied  in the last half of this book, i.e. the Revival  of Religion's  
Disciplines;  and the knowledge  of what the heart raises to the organs,  in their  
religious  services  and tradidons,  and it is implied  in the first half  of this book.
The third type stands  for the preliminary  sciences,  and it acts as instruments  
like linguistics  and grammar,  which  are instruments  of the knowledge  of Allah's  
Book,  and the sunnah  of His Messenger  "Peace  be upon  him".
To be sure, both linguistics  and grammar  are not legal sciences  in themselves,  
but they should  be studied  for the sake of Islamic  law "Shari'ah",  which  has come  
in the language  of the Arabs;  and since there no law but that it appears  in a 
certain  language,  learning  such language  as instrument  (to understand  it becomes  
necessary).
Although  the science  of calligraphy  is an instrument  in itself, it is not 
necessary  to learn it since the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" was an 
unlettered  Prophet.  But, if memorization  is thought  to be sufficient  to record  all 
that is heard,  calligraphy  then might  become  dispensable.  But, as long  as it fails to 
do so, the science  of calligraphy  becomes  almost  necessary.
The fourth  type stands  for the supplementary  sciences;  and as far as the Holy  
Qur'an  is concerned,  its related  sciences  are divided  into what  deals  with  wording,  
like learning  the different  ways of recitation,  pronunciation,  what deals with the 
meaning,  like the exegesis,  which  also depends  upon  transmission,  since  language  
alone could not cover  the whole  of it, and what deals with its commandments,  
like learning  the abrogating  and abrogated  (Verses),  the general  and private,  the 
hidden  and the apparent  and the way of using  some  of those  with others;  and all 
of that is included  in the science  that is called  the fundaments  of jurisprudence,  
which  also deals  with the sunnah.
The supplementary  sciences,  as far as the traditions  and stories  are concerned,  
include  the knowledge  of the men, their names  and ancestries,  the names  and 
characteristics  of the companions  (of the Prophet),  the knowledge  of Criticism  
and evaluation  (of Hadith  narrators)  in order  to distinguish  the reliable  from the 
unreliable,  the knowledge  of their ages, in order that the Mursal  (among  the 
Prophetic  traditions)  should  be distinguished  from the Musnad,  in addition  to all 
the sciences  related to that: those are the legal sciences,  and they all are 
praiseworthy,  and learning  them  is a collective  duty.
If you say: Why have you joined  the religious  jurisprudence  with the sciences  
of this world?
It should  be known  that Allah  Almighty  brought  Adam  "Peace  be upon  him"  
from the soil, and drew forth his offspring  (out of him) from a quintessence  of 
clay, through  flowing  semen,  and He brought  them out of the loins (of men) to 
the wombs  (of women)  from which  (He brought  them out) to the world,  from33


Page 36:
The quarter  of the acts of worship34
which  (He caused  them  to die and go) to the graves,  from  which  (they  would  go)
the Day of Judgement)  from to the place of demonstration  (before  Him  
which  (they  would  go) either  to the Garden  or to the fire.
As such are their beginning,  ending,  and dwelling.  Furthermore,  He Almighty  
has created  the world  to act as provision  for the time (of the hereafter)  in order  
that one should  take from it what  is most fitting  for him to take on his journey  
(to the hereafter).  Had they lived in this world  with justice  and fairness,  there  
would  have been no disputes  among  them,  and thus, there would  have been  
need for religious  jurists.  But on the contrary,  they lived in it with desires  (in 
opposition  to justice),  and it is that which  gave birth to disputes  among  them.  For 
this reason,  a need has been felt for a ruler to drive them, and the ruler has 
become  in need for a law therewith  to drive  them.on
no
The jurist then is the one who has knowledge  of the laws that govern  politics,  
and the way of mediation  between  the people  once they fall in dispute  because  of 
their different  desires.  Thus,  the jurist is the tutor and guide  of the ruler to the 
ways  of leading  and adjusting  his wards,  in order  to organize  their  affairs  as much  
as they are right.
By my life, it is also concerned  with religion,  even though  not by itself so 
much  as it is through  this world,  since this world  acts as the farm of the hereafter,  
and the religion  could  not be achieved  but through  this world.
However,  both dominion  and religion  are twins  in the sense that the religion  
stands  for the foundation,  and power  for a guardian,  and anything  having  no 
foundation  should  inevitably  collapse,  and anything  having  no guardian  should  
inevitably  be lost. Furthermore,  both dominion  and adjustment  could not be 
achieved  but by power,  and the way of adjustment  by deciding  the matters  
(between  the people)  is realized  by jurisprudence.
As well as the policy  of the people  by power  does not principally  belong  to the 
science  of religion  since it is concerned  with that, without  which the religion  
could not be achieved,  so is the knowledge  of the way of policy.  It is a well-  
known  fact that pilgrimage  (for example)  could  not be done except  with the help  
of a convoy  of guardians  along  the way (to and from the places  of Hajj),  but of a 
surety,  performing  Hajj in itself  is one thing,  following  the way to perform  Hajj is 
another  thing  (different  from  that),  doing  the job of guarding  without  which  Hajj  
could  not be done  is a third thing,  and the knowledge  of the ways,  laws and tricks  
of guarding  is a fourth  thing.
In short, the jurisprudence  is the knowledge  of politics  and guardianship,  as 
clearly  shown  from the following  narration  (of Ibn Majah  on the authority  of 
Amr Ibn Shu'aib  from his father  from his grandfather):  "None  gives verdicts  to 
the people  except  three persons:  a ruler, a person  who is commanded  (by the 
ruler  to do so), and a person  who does so with no need."
The ruler acts as the imam and leader,  and it was their habit to give the 
verdicts  by themselves.  The person  who is ordered  to do so is his viceroy  (whom  
he appoints  and asks to do so on his behalf).  The third one is him, who does  
undertake  this task with no need  (nor command  from  the ruler  to do so).


Page 37:
35 Book  One:  Knowledge
The holy companions  (of the Prophet)  "Allah  be pleased  with them"  used to 
be careful  of giving  religious  verdicts,  to the extent  that each of them used to 
refer (the questions  and cases  about  which  he would  be asked)  to his companion.  
But they were not likewise  cautious  whenever  they were asked about their  
knowledge  of the Qur'an,  the way to the hereafter.
According  to different  narrations,  the third person  stands for the one who  
does so to be seen of men instead  of the one who does so with no need.  To be 
sure, if one runs the risk of giving  religious  verdicts,  without  being  needed  for 
that, nothing  other  than seeking  for wealth  and authority  will be intended.
If you say that It is true that this applies  to the judgements  pertaining  to 
wounds,  limits,  mulcts  and deciding  the matters  of disputes,  it might  not apply  to 
what is included  in the quarter  of services,  like prayer  and fasting,  or what is 
implied  in the quarter  of traditions,  like the treatments,  and showing  what is 
lawful  and what  is unlawful'.
It should  be known  then that the religious  jurist more often than not, talks  
about three of those which  belong  to the deeds of the hereafter:  Islam,  both  
prayer  and obligatory  charity,  and showing  what is lawful  and what is unlawful;  
and if you consider  the farthest  extent  to which  a jurist might  reach  in reflecting  
those,  you will know  that by no means  does he transcend  the limits  of this world  
to the hereafter,  and if you are sure of this fact as far as those three are 
concerned,  it might  be much  clearer  in anything  else.
As for Islam,  a jurist  talks about  what  makes  it right and what  makes  it wrong,  
as well as about its condidons.  He does not pay his attention  but to what is 
uttered  by the tongue,  since the (intention  implied  in the) heart is beyond  the 
authority  of a jurist, for the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" held back  
those  of power  and authority  from (killing  because  of) it when  he said (according  
to the narration  of Muslim  on the authority  of Usamah  Ibn Zaid):  "Why  have  you 
not cut open his heart  (in order  to know  his real intention)?"  he said that to him 
(Usamah  Ibn Zaid) who killed the person  who uttered  the statement  of Islam,  
when he based his apology  on the fact that he had said so but for fear of the 
sword.
Moreover,  a jurist  might  judge that one's Islam  is right, even under  the shade  
of swords,  in spite of his knowledge  that the sword  did not disclose  to him his 
real intention,  nor did it remove  the veil of ignorance  and confusion  from his 
heart.  But he is frightened  by the swordsman,  (which  forces  him to say so) since  
the sword  might  be stretched  to cut off his neck, and the hand to usurp his 
property;  and this statement  (of testimony)  with the tongue  protects  both his 
neck and property,  as long as he has a neck (life) and property  (which  he expects  
to be saved).  But this is held valid  only in this world.
For this reason,  the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said (on the 
authority  of Abu Hurairah  and Ibn Umar):  "I've commanded  (by Allah  Almighty)  
to fight the people until they bear testimony  that 'There is no god(to be 
rshipped)  but Allah  Almighty':  if they say so, they will have protected  from  
their blood  and property  (except  legally,  i.e. with just cause)."  He thus made themewo


Page 38:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 36
effect  of that in both  blood  and property.
But the wealth  could  be of no benefit  for the hereafter  so much  as the lights,  
mysteries  and devotion  of hearts  could;  and a jurist  has nothing  to do with that: if 
he is to be engaged  in it, he will seem as if he is engaged  in theology  and 
medicine;  and thus he will go beyond  his art.
As for the prayer,  a jurist  gives his verdict  that it is right, as long as all of its 
acts, even only in form,  and die apparent  circumstances  are realized,  although  
might  be heedless,  from the beginning  to the ending  of his prayer,  except  at 
the rime of reciting  Takbir,  and engaged  in thinking  in the affairs of his 
treatments  in the market.  As well as the testimony  of Islam  only by tongue  will 
not avail, this kind of prayer (in which one's heart does not entertain  the 
submission  and fear of Allah  Almighty)  will be of no advantage  in the hereafter.  
But a jurist gives the religious  verdict  of validity,  since what is done comes  in 
response  to Allah's  Command,  and thus cancels  out the punishment  of killing  or 
scolding.
But even,  a jurist  does not discuss  the heart's  submission  and entertaining  the 
fear of Allah  Almighty,  which  stand  for the real work  of the hereafter,  therewith  
all the deeds  will be rewardable;  and if he discusses  it, he will then go beyond  hisone
art.
As for the obligatory  charity,  a jurist considers  what cancels  out the ruler's  
demand  for it, and if one refuses  to give it and the ruler  takes  it with compulsion,  
he will judge  that he has become  free (of responsibility).
In this issue,  it is related  that Abu Yusuf  used to give as a gift his wealth  to his 
wife towards  the end of every  year, and at the beginning  of the coming  year, he 
would  ask her to give it back to him as a gift, in order  to cancel  out from himself  
the obligatory  charity  due upon his property.  When this was narrated  to Abu  
Hanifah  "Allah's  Mercy  be upon  him" he said: "This  is (valid)  in accordance  with  
his jurisprudence."  However,  he has told the truth.  But this is in accordance  only  
with the jurisprudence  of this world,  but its drawback  in the hereafter  will be 
much more grievous  than any crime else; and this is a clear example  of the 
harmful  science.
As far as both what  is lawful  and what  is unlawful  are concerned,  it is out or 
good religion  (and faith) to refrain  from what is unlawful.  But there are four  
grades  of such abstention:
The first abstention  is that which  stands  as requisite  to the justice  of a witness,  
and if he observes  it not, he will have no power  of authority  to give witness,  or 
become  a member  of judiciary  or government.  It is to refrain  from  what  is clearly  
and evidently  unlawful.
The second  is the abstention  of the righteous  good men, according  to which  
one refrains  from  what  is suspicious,  in which  both lawful  and unlawful  are likely  
possible.  The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said (according  to the 
narration  of At-Tirmidhi,  An-Nasa'i  and Ibn Hibban  on the authority  of Al- 
Hassan  Ibn Ali): "Leave  what  arouses  suspicion  in you (and stick) to what  
no suspicion  in you."  The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  him" further  said 
(according  to the narration  of Al-Baihaqiarouses
the authority  of Ibn Mas'ud):  "It is on


Page 39:
Book  One: Knowledge  --------------------------------------------------------
(sufficient  for) a sin to have  doubt  in the hearts  (as to what  is done)."
The third is the abstention  observed  by the Allah-fearing  pious men. It is to 
leave  what  is merely  lawful  lest its doing  might  lead to doing  what  is unlawful.  In 
this context,  the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said (according  to the 
narration  of At-Tirmidhi,  Ibn Majah  on the authority  of Atiyyah  As-Sa'idi):  "A 
man does not belong  to the Allah-fearing  pious  until he leaves  that in which  there  
is no harm,  for fear of that in which  there  is harm."
The example  of that is to abstain  from talking  about  the states  of the people,  
lest it might  lead to backbiting  them,  to abstain  from devouring  what  is desired  
for, lest it might result in raising  excessive  activity  and vanity  which  leads to 
committing  taboos.
The fourth  is the abstention  observed  by the truly and faithfully  believers;  and 
it is to refrain  from anything  other than Allah Almighty,  lest they would  spend  
any moment  of their lives in anything  that does not bring them closer  to (the 
Presence  of) Allah Almighty,  even though  they are certain  it does not lead to 
what  is forbidden.
The religious  jurist  has nothing  to do with those,  barring  the first one relating  
to the abstention  of witnesses,  judges and rulers, and what condemns  their  
justice,  which  will not cancel  out the sin in the hereafter.  The Messenger  of Allah  
"Peace  be upon him" said to Wabisah  (according  to the narration  of Ahmad):  
"Seek  the guidance  of your heart,  even though  the people  give you their  verdicts,  
even  though  the people  give you their  verdicts."
The religious  has also nothing  to do with the suspicions  of hearts,  and the way 
of acting  upon them,  since he is mainly  concerned  with what condemns  justice;  
and that is because  all of his reflections  should  be on the affairs  of this world,  
with which  the way to the hereafter  might  be right. If he talks about  the states  of 
the hearts,  and the rules of the hereafter,  this will be included  in his speech  by 
way of curiosity,  in the same way as his speech  implies  something  about  
medicine,  arithmetic's,  astronomy  and theology,  or as grammar  and poetry  imply  
wisdom.
Sufyan,  who was a master  in the exoteric  science  used to say that seeking  
after that is not beneficial  for the provision  of the hereafter.  But how should  
it be since they unanimously  agree  on the fact that it is a great  honour  for any 
science  that it is necessary  to act upon  it? How  then should  one think  that this 
applies  to the knowledge  of Zihar (one's forbidding  his wife to him in the 
same way as is the back of his mother),  Li'an (being  engaged  in invoking  
Allah's  Curse upon the liar of the couple  if the husband  launches  a charge  
against  his wife of committing  adultery),  the payment  in advance,  hiring,  
exchange  of currency,  (and the like of them)?  The one who learns them in 
order  only to come  much closer  to (the Presence  of) Allah Almighty  is mad.  
However,  the deed (which  brings  one closer  to Allah)  should  stem from the 
heart,  and the organs  respond  to that; and the intended  honour  is concerned  
with those  deeds.
If you say: 'Why have you made religious  jurisprudence  equal to medicine,  
since  medicine  deals  with the world,  as far as the health  of the body  is concerned,37


Page 40:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
to which  the validity  of die religion  is related,  even though  this equality  stands  
against  the unanimity  of Muslims?
It should  be known  to you that the equality  between  them  is unnecessary,  and 
there  are three  points  of superiority  the religious  jurisprudence  has:
The first is diat religious  jurisprudence  is a legal science,  since it is acquired  
from  Prophediood,  unlike  medicine,  which  does not belong  to law.
The second  is that it is indispensable  for anyone  of whose  who follow  the 
right way to the hereafter,  be it ill or well, unlike medicine,  for which none  
barring  the ailing  are in need,  and those  constitute  the minority.
The third is that religious  jurisprudence  lives close to the knowledge  of the 
way to the hereafter,  for it deals with the deeds of organs,  and it is well-known  
that the heart  is the primal  source  and origin  of the deeds  of organs.
The praiseworthy  among  the deeds stem from the praiseworthy  manners,  
which  is to save (their  doer) in the hereafter,  as well as the blameworthy  among  
the deeds stem from the blameworthy  bad manners;  and it is not hidden  that 
there  is intimate  relation  between  both heart  and organs.
But as for good  and poor health,  its primal  source  and origin  is the purity  of 
temperament  and humors;  and this is characteristic  to the body and not to the 
heart. For this reason,  whatever  religious  jurisprudence  is compared  with  
medicine,  the superiority  of the former  is evidently  clear,  in the same  way as if the 
knowledge  of the way to the hereafter  is compared  with religious  jurisprudence,  
the superiority  of the former  is obviously  apparent.
If you ask me to explain  to you the knowledge  of the way to the hereafter  with  
clarification  which  includes  its parts,  even though  it could  by no means  imply  all 
of its details:  it should  be known  to you then that it is of two divisions:  the 
science  of Revelation,  and the science  of Practical  Religion.
The Science  of Revelation
The first division  is that of revelation,  and it is the knowledge  of the 
inward:  it is the finality  of all sciences.  One of the knowledgeable  men said:  
"He, who has no share  in this knowledge,  I am afraid that he would  have an 
evil end; and the least portion  of it is to have trust in it, and submit  to its 
men."  Another  one said: "He, who has the characteristics  of arrogance  and 
innovation  of heresies,  nothing  of this knowledge  would  be shown  to him."  It 
is also said that "he refers to the one, who loves the world,  and insists  on 
fulfilling  a desire  which has not been fulfilled  through  it, and it might  be 
fulfilled  through  other  sciences."
The slightest  punishment  of him, who denies  this knowledge  is that he will 
taste nothing  of its (sweetness).  According  to a poetic  verse in this respect:  "As 
for what disappears  from you: this is a sin which  implies  the punishment  related  
to it."38
Furthermore,  the knowledge  of revelation  is the knowledge  of the true and 
faithful  believers  and those  brought  close (to the Presence  of Allah Almighty):  it 
light which  shines  in the heart  once it is purified  and cleansed  from such of is a


Page 41:
Book  One: Knowledge 39
blameworthy  characteristics  as it has.
With the help of that light, a lot of things  are disclosed,  which  he earlier  used  
to hear their names,  and think it had general  and ambiguous  meanings,  which  
come to be gradually  evident  and clear until a real knowledge  of Allah's  Nature,  
abiding,  never-ending  perfect  Qualities,  acts, His Ordinance  of creating  the world  
and the hereafter,  the point  of superiority  given  by Him to the hereafter  over this 
world, the knowledge  of the concept  of Prophethood  and the Prophet,  the 
concept  of the Divine  Revelation,  the concept  of Satan, the meaning  of the 
words  "angels  and Satans"  and how Satans  are enemies  to mankind,  and how the 
angel  appears  to the Prophets,  and how the Divine  Inspiration  has been revealed  
to them,  the knowledge  of the Dominion  of both the heavens  and the earth,  the 
knowledge  of the heart,  and how the soldiers  of angels  and Satans  come  to blows  
with each other  in it, the knowledge  of difference  between  the angel's  visitations  
and Satan's  visitations,  the knowledge  of the hereafter,  with its Garden  and fire 
(of Hell),  the punishment  of the grave,  the bridge  (which  will be held over the fire 
of Hell and lead to the Garden),  the balance  (of deeds),  and reckoning.
(He also will come  to know)  the significance  of Allah's  Statement:  "(It will be 
said to him): "Read  your (own)  record;  sufficient  is your soul this day to make  out 
an account  against  you.""  (Al-Isra ’ 14)
And the significance  of Allah's  Saying:  "But  verily  the Home  in the Hereafter,  
that is life indeed,  if they but knew."  (Al-Ankabut  64)
<( ®><>*3 iiIjSiA-  V ^*>$• Zup  V
(He also will know) the significance  of the meeting  with Allah Almighty,  
looking  at His Honoured  Generous  Countenance,  coming  close to His Presence,  
and the concept  of the achievement  of felicity  in the company  of the highest  
assembly  (of angels  and inhabitants  of the heaven),  and approaching  the angels  
and Prophets,  and the value of the difference  of degrees  the inhabitants  of the 
Garden  will have, to the extent  that they will see each other  in the same way as 
one sees a shining  star in the middle  of the sky, and the like of that, which  is too 
long  to be explained  here in detail.
However,  the people  are different  in their understanding  of those concepts,  
even though  they have trust and belief  in their foundation:  some  think  that all of 
those are but samples,  since Allah Almighty  has prepared  for His righteous  
servants  what no eye has ever seen, no ear has ever heard  of, and no mind has 
thought  of, and the creatures  have no idea of the Garden  beyond  the ever
characteristics  and names  (of its contents).  Some think that many  of those are 
examples,  as well as many  comply  with their  realities  as they are understood  from  
their words.  Some think that the utmost  knowledge  one should  have of Allah  
Almighty  is to confess  his failure  to have knowledge  of His (Nature  and Reality).  
Some  claim  grievous  things  in their knowledge  of Allah  Almighty.  Some  say that 
'The limit  of the knowledge  of Allah  Almighty  is the farthest  end which  the belief


Page 42:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
of the public audience  reaches,  i.e. that He Almighty  is Ever-Existing,,  
Omniscient,  All-Powerful,  All-Hearing,  All-Seeing,  Talking.
We mean,  by the science  of Revelation,  to lift the veil so that the truth of 
those things  'should  be disclosed,  so much clear as if they are visible,  in which  
there is no doubt;  and this is possible  according  to the essence  and nature  of 
mankind,  had it not been for the fact that the rust and impurities  have heaped  up 
on the mirror  of both heart  and mind  by virtue  of the dirt of this world.
We mean,  by the knowledge  of the way to the hereafter,  the way of polishing  
this mirror,  and cleansing  it from dirt and impurities,  which act as a veil (of 
mankind)  from Allah  Almighty,  as well as from the knowledge  of His Qualities  
and Actions.
(This mirror)  could  be cleansed  and purified  by refraining  from lusts and 
following  the steps of the Prophets  "Allah's  blessing  and Peace be upon  
them"  in all their states  as much  as what becomes  clear from the heart,  with  
the truth,  in which  all its realides  glitter.  There  is no way to it but through  
exercise,  which  will be explained  later, in addidon  to learning  and teaching.  
This is the knowledge  that could not be written  in books,  nor could  anyone,  
upon whom  Allah Almighty  has bestowed  a pordon  thereof  talk about it, 
unless  it is with its real men,  and he does so, as one of its members,  by way of 
studying  and out of confidentiality.
This is the well-guarded  knowledge,  intended  by the Messenger  of Allah  
"Peace  be upon him" when he said (according  to As-Salami's  narration  on the 
authority  of Abu Hurairah):  "From  among  the (sciences  belonging  to) knowledge,  
there is that which  seems as though  hidden,  and none perceives  it but those  
endued  with knowledge  of Allah  Almighty;  and once they speak  it, none  becomes  
ignorant  of it barring  those  who deceive  themselves  by (the false impression  that 
they have real knowledge  of) Allah  Almighty.  So, do not look down  upon  any of 
those  learned  men upon whom  Allah  Almighty  has conferred  a portion  of this 
knowledge,  for in no way has Allah  Almighty  scorned  him when He has given  
him that (piece  of) knowledge."40
The science  of practical  religion
The other  division  stands  for the science  of Practical  Religion,  and it is the 
knowledge  of the different  states of the heart. From among  the praiseworthy  
states, a mention  might be made of patience,  gratitude,  fear (of Allah's  
punishment)  and hope (for Allah's  reward),  contentment,  abstinence,  Allah-  
fearingness,  satisfaction,  generosity,  appreciation  of the gift for Allah  Almighty  in 
all the states, faithfulness,  good thinking  (of Allah Almighty),  good  
good  companionship,  truthfulness,  and fidelity.
It is a part of the knowledge  of the way to hereafter  to learn the realities  of 
these  different  states:  their limits  and causes,  which  give rise to them,  fruits,  and 
signs, and the treatment  of the weak among  them until it becomes  strong,  and 
what  has vanished  among  them  until  it is restored  to its original
The blameworthy  among  them comprise  the fear of poverty,  feeling  ofmanners,
state.


Page 43:
Book  One: Knowledge  
resentment  for what is Divinely  decreed,  grudge,  spitefulness,  envy, cheadng,  
asking  for supremacy,  love of being  praised,  love of having  long life in this world  
only for enjoyment,  arrogance,  showing  off, anger,  conceitedness,  enmity,  hatred,  
greediness,  niggardliness,  desire  (for what  is forbidden),  over-spending,  rudeness,  
ungratefulness,  exalting  the wealthy,  and despising  the poor, sense of pride,  
haughtiness,  rivalry,  boasting,  feeling  too supercilious  to tell or recognize  the 
truth, middling  in that which  is not of one's concern,  the love of useless  talks,  
obstinacy,  getting  adorned  for the people,  adulation,  conceit,  being  diverted  from  
one's defects  by being  engaged  in the defects  of the others,  alienation  of both  
grief and fear (of Allah Almighty)  from the heart,  extreme  enthusiasm  for self-  
reprisal  in case one is put to humiliation,  lukewarm  support  of the truth,  
outwardly  announcing  brotherhood,  and outwardly  fostering  enmity,  feeling  safe 
from the plans of Allah Almighty  to take away what He has given,  depending  
only upon sneakiness,  treachery,  deception,  the long hope (for fulfilling  what is 
desired),  cruelty,  harshness,  ecstasy  of world's  pleasures,  and dejection  at their  
loss, feeling  entertained  with the creatures,  and feeling  lonely  for leaving  them,  
unkindness,  recklessness,  hastiness,  lack of shyness  and mercy.
Those  (blameworthy  qualities)  and their like from among  the characteristics  
and states of the heart are seed-beds  of lewdness  and nursery-gardens  of 
turpitudes.
Their opposites,  i.e. the praiseworthy  manners  are the fountain-head  of (all 
good deeds  of) obedience  and works  that bring  one much  closer  (to the Presence  
of Allah  Almighty).  The knowledge  of the realities,  definitions,  reasons,  fruits  and 
treatment  of those  things  constitutes  the knowledge  of the (way to the) hereafter;  
and it is an obligatory  duty (whose  learning  is binding  upon every Muslim)  
according  to the verdict  of those  endued  with the knowledge  of the hereafter.
One who leaves  it will be ruined  in the hereafter  according  to the power  of the 
King  of all kings,  as well as one who leaves  the evident  deeds  will be ruined  with  
the swords  of the rulers of this world,  according  to the verdict  of its religious  
jurists.  Having  taken that, the jurists  then are mainly  interested  in the obligator} ’ 
duty (whose  doing  is binding  upon  every  Muslim)  as far as the straightness  of this 
world is concerned,  whereas  this (piece of knowledge)  is interested  in the 
straightness  of the hereafter.  If a jurist  is asked  about  any of those  concepts,  say, 
for example,  about  the concept  of fidelity,  or about  the concept  of having  trust  in 
Allah  Almighty,  or even about  the point  of refraining  from showing  off, surely,  
he will stop (and give no answer)  although  it is an obligatory  duty (whose  learning  
is binding  upon  every  Muslim),  and indulgence  in it leads  to his destruction  in the 
hereafter.  But if you ask him about  Li'an,  Zihar,  launching  false charge  (against  
others),  he will relate  as many  volumes  of detailed  data to you, which  might  not 
be needed  for a long time; and even if there is a need for anything  of them,  a 
town could hardly  has none to undertake  it, and suffice  him the provision  of 
putting  himself  to trouble  because  of it. But on the contrary,  he keeps putting  
himself  to trouble  because  of it during  his night  and day, neglecting  in his study  
what  is of greater  significance  in itself  for the sake of the religion.  If he is asked41


Page 44:
I
The quarter  of die acts of worship
about the reason  for doing  so, he will say: "I've been occupied  by that for it 
belongs  to the science  of religion,  and one of the collecdve  duties , putting,  by 
doing  so, himself  and die others  to confusion.
The intelligent  among  men knows,  for sure, that if the purpose  is to regard  it 
in truth as being  one of the collective  duties,  he would,  of a surety,  give priority  
to the obligatory  duty (which  is binding  upon  every  Muslim)  upon die collective  
duty, and moreover,  he would  give preference  to many  collective  duties  over it. 
Many  are the cities  in which  there  are no physicians  barring  from  among  the non-  
Muslim  protectees  (who have covenants  of security  from the Muslims),  even  
though  their witness  pertaining  to physicians  as much as the judgements  of 
jurisprudence  are concerned,  are unacceptable.  But even, we could hardly  see 
anyone  practicing  it, by the time they hasten  to take jurisprudence  as profession  
in general,  and die matters  of dispute  and debate  in particular;  and the town  
might  be filled with religious  jurists,  who are involved  n giving  religious  verdicts  
a id answers  to the different  questions.
What grief! How should the religious  jurists give concession  to take as 
profession  a collective  duty,  undertaken  by many,  and indulge  in that which  none  
undertakes?  Is there any reason  for that except  that it is not easy for a physician  
to be appointed  as a custodian  over endowments  and the execution  of bequests,  
to be a guardian  over the property  of the orphans,  to have the high positions  of 
judgement  and government,  to move  forward  to be superior  to one's fellows,  and 
have the power  of authority  over  one's  enemies?
How far! How far! Of a surety,  the real science  of religion  has been obliterated  
because  the learned  men dressed  it in an evil dress:  It is Allah Alone,  Whose  aid 
we seek for, and to Whom  we take shelter,  to save us from this deceit  which  
dissatisfies  (Allah)  Most  Gracious,  and causes  Satan  to smile.
The righteous  pious learned  men of the outward  sciences  regard  with high  
appreciation  the excellence  and value the learned  men of inward  and those  who  
have knowledge  of hearts had. The grand imam Shafi'i  used to sit in front of 
Shaiban,  the shepherd,  in the same way as a student  sits in a nursery  school  and 
ask him how he should  do in such and such; and when  it was said to him: "Is it 
fitting  for the like of you to ask this Bedouin?"  he said: "No doubt,  this has been  
guided  to know  that of which  we have  been  heedless."
Furthermore,  both Ahmad  Ibn Hanbal  "Allah be pleased  with him" and 
Yahya  Ibn Ma'in  (his disciple)  used to visit Ma'ruf  Al-Karkhi,  who was not of the 
same  standing  as they were in the exoteric  knowledge,  and ask him; and why not 
since the Messenger  of Allah "Peace be upon him" said (according  to the 
narration  of At-Tabarani  on the authority  of Ibn Abbas),  in reply  to the question:  
"How  should  we do if something  is raised  to us, which  we do not find in Allah's  
Book,  nor in the sunnah?"  he "Peace  be upon  him" said: "Ask the good men,  and 
make  it a matter  of consultation  among  them."
For this reason,  it is said that "the learned  men of the exoteric  knowledge  
the adornment  of both the earth and its kingdom,  and the learned  men of the 
esoteric  knowledge  are the adornment  of the heaven  and its dominion."42
are


Page 45:
43 Book  One:  Knowledge
Al-Junaid  said: One day, my mister  As-Sari  said to me: "When  you stand and 
leave me: with whom  are you going  to keep sitting?"  I said: "With  Al-Muhasibi."  
He said: "Well.  Take from his knowledge,  and keep it close to you, and leave his 
affectadon  in speech,  and refutation  of theologians."  When  I turned  away  I heard  
him having  said: "Might  Allah make  you a traditionist  first, and then a Sufi, and 
not a Sufi first who becomes  a tradidonist."  He refers to the fact that he, who  
first is well-versed  in tradidon  and knowledge  and then becomes  a Sufi has, 
indeed,  achieved  felicity,  and he, who is a Sufi before  being acquainted  with  
tradidon  and knowledge  has, indeed,  put himself  in danger.
If you say: "Why  have you not brought  both theology  and philosophy  among  
the divisions  of sciences,  and show whether  they are praiseworthy  or 
blameworthy?"
It should  be known  to you that such of intellectual  proofs  which  might  be of 
benefit  as are included  in theology,  are also implied  in both the Holy  Qur'an  and 
the tradidons;  and what is beyond  them are either  reprehensible  argumentation  
which  is one of heresies  innovation  as it will be shown  clearly  later, or (no more  
than) mere wrangling  by dwelling  on distinctions  or amplification  through  the 
array  of different  opinions,  most  of which  are derived  and nonsense,  despised  by 
the mind and rejected  by the ears, while others are ramblings  into things  
unrelated  to religion  and not customary  during  the first period  of Islam,  but those  
discourses  in total were out of heresies  innovation.  But now, many  things  have  
changed.
Some innovations  of heresies  which have diverted  a lot from the Holy  
Qur'an  and the Prophetic  sunnah  have broken  up, and a new group has 
appeared,  whose  members  have patched  up similes  and composed  speeches  
pertaining  to that, which  led to the fact that what was forbidden  came to be 
permissible  by necessity,  if not one of the collective  duties,  as much  as should  
argue  against  the innovated  heresies,  in case the call for innovation  of heresies  
is intended,  but to some extent,  which we shall mention  in the coming  
chapter,  Allah  Willing.
The parts  of philosophy
As for philosophy,  it is not science  in itself,  but it is of four parts:
The first includes  both geometry  and arithmetic's,  and they are permissible  so 
far as there  is no fear for one who is engaged  in them to transcend  them to other  
blameworthy  sciences;  and that's because  most of those who were engaged  in 
them have gone beyond  them to many  innovations  of heresies.  For this reason,  
the weak among  the people  should  be safeguarded  from them even though  not 
for their own sake, in the same way as a nervous  one should  be saved from  
standing  on the shore of a river, for fear he might  fall into the water,  or in the 
same way as the new convert  into Islam  should  be saved from mixing  with the 
infidels,  for fear of their negative  impact  upon him, putting  in mind that it is 
undesirable  for the strong  (among  Muslims)  to mix with them.
The second  is the logic,  whose  objective  is to look for the point  of proof  and


Page 46:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
its conditions,  and the point  of term and its conditions,  and both are implied  in 
theology.
The third comprises  ontology,  which is to search for Allah  s Nature  and 
Qualities;  and this is included  in theology.  However,  philosophers  have no 
independent  science  unique  to them in this respect.  But they have different  
doctrines  within its framework,  some of which are blasphemous  and some  
ground-breaking  As well as segregation  is not an independent  science  in itself,  
but its men are no more than a group  of theologists,  and those of research  and 
consideration,  who have false doctrines  unique  to them  in this respect,  so are the 
philosophers.
The fourth  includes  physiology,  and some of it stand in opposition  to law, 
religion  and truth;  and it is much  closer  to ignorance,  and not knowledge  in order  
to be placed  in the divisions  of sciences,  and some  are concerned  with the search  
for the characteristics  and properties  of bodies,  and the way of their change.  In 
this point  it is similar  to medicine,  with the difference  that a physician  considers  
the human  body as far as good and poor health is concerned,  whereas  they  
consider  all physical  bodies,  as far as their change  and motion  are concerned.  But 
medicine  is superior  to it, since it is needed  for, but there is no need for this 
science  of physiology.  Therefore,  this does not stand  against  the fact that it is one 
of the arts whose  learning  and practicing  are collective  duty, for the purpose  of 
guarding  the minds of the public audience  from falling as victims  of the 
imaginations  of the innovators  of heresies.
This has come to be needed  for because  of the new innovations,  as well as 
man has become  in need for hiring  a convoy  of guards  on the way to (the places  
of) Hajj,  when  the highway  men appeared;  and had there  not been those  highway  
men,  hiring  those  guards  would  not have become  one of the requisites  of the way 
to (the places  of) Hajj. So, had the innovator  left his nonsense,  there  would  have  
been no need for anything  more than what was familiar  during  the age of the 
holy companions  "Allah  be pleased  with them".
Based  upon that, let a theologist  know  his limit beyond  which  he should  not 
go in the religion,  in which  his position  is like that of a guardian  on the way to 
(the places  of) Hajj: as well as if a guard  is devoted  to guarding,  he will not be one 
of the pilgrims,  if a theologian  is mainly  involved  in argumentation  and defence,  
and rather  does not follow  the way to the hereafter,  nor is he engaged  in looking  
after and making  straight  the heart, he will not be one of the religious  learned  
men,  and in this way, a theologist  will have no portion  of the religion  other  than  
the faith,  which  is shared  by the public  audience,  and it is one of the deeds  of the 
outward  heart and tongue;  and there remains  the art of argumentation  and 
guarding  which  distinguishes  him from  the public.
But as for the knowledge  of Allah  Almighty,  His Qualities  and Actions,  and all 
that we mentioned  as part of the knowledge  of revelation,  it is not acquired  from  
theology,  for indeed,  theology  is likely a covering  veil over it. It could not be 
achieved  but through  striving  which  Allah Almighty  has made preliminary  to 
guidance,  as shown  from His statement:  " And those  who strive  in Our (Cause),44


Page 47:
Book  One:  Knowledge
We will certainly  guide  them to Our Paths:  for verily  Allah  is with those  who do 
right."  (Al-Ankabut  69)45
^ Qite***^ ^ 0j3 ^*5 1* J41*“ 0^13  ^
If you say: "You've  reduced  the designation  of a theologists  to merely  a 
guard over the faith of the public audience  from being vulnerable  to 
distortion  by the innovators  of heresies,  in the same  way Allah  Almighty:  how  
then should  you lower  their ranks to such an inferior  status  in relation  to the 
science  of religion?"
It should  be know to you that he, who knows  the truth only with men will 
surely  be thrown  into confusion  and straying  drifts.  So, let you know  the truth  
first so that you would  come to know  its men, if you are to follow  the way of 
truth; and if you are satisfied  with the tradition,  and consider  the ranks of 
superiority  well-known  among  the people,  be not heedless  then of the high rank  
of the holy companions.
There is unanimity  among  those whom  I've menuoned  that they (the holy  
companions)  had the priority  and precedence  over the others:  their high position  
as far as religion  is concerned  was unattainable,  as well as their supremacy  was 
unsurpassable.  But even,  in no way was their precedence  by virtue  of theology  or 
religious  jurisprudence  so much  as it was by their knowledge  of the (way to the) 
hereafter,  and following  its right  way.
Abu Bakr "Allah  be pleased  with him" (for example)  did not excel his fellows  
because  he observed  so much  (voluntary)  fasts, nor because  he offered  so much  
(voluntary)  prayers,  nor because  he narrated  so much  traditions,  nor because  he 
gave so much  religious  verdicts,  nor because  he was a good theologists,  but (he 
excelled  the others)  because  he had something  (of faith and trust in the Prophet  
unique  to him) which  resided  in his breast  as confirmed  by the witness  of the 
chief  of the Messengers  "Peace  be upon  him" in his favour.
So, let you be eager  to get this secret,  for it is as valuable  as a precious  Jim, and 
well-guarded  pearl,  and leave that, which  the majority  of the people  agree upon  
getting  it, and estimating  it with high consideration  and giving  it a great value,  
only for reasons  and points,  whose  details  are too long to be explained  here. The 
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" died, leaving  many thousands  of the 
holy companions  "Allah  be pleased  with him" all of whom  were knowledgeable  
of Allah Almighty;  and the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" praised  
them. Even  though,  none of them was perfect  in the art of theology.  Moreover,  
none  among  them held himself  to give religious  verdicts  more than three  to nine  
over ten men.
However,  Ibn Umar "Allah  be pleased  with him" was one of those (learned  
men).  But whenever  he was asked  to give a religious  verdict,  he would  say: "Go  
to so and so, the governor,  who was appointed  to be in charge  of the people's  
affairs,  and place it in his neck."  He refers  here to the fact that giving  religious  
verdicts  pertaining  to cases and judgements  is consequential  to the matter  of 
ruling  and leading  subjects.


Page 48:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
When  Umar  Ibn Al-Khattab  died, Ibn Mas'ud  said: "No doubt,  nine-tenth  the 
true knowledge  vanished."  It was said to him: "How  do you say so, since the 
majority  of the holy companions  still live among  us?" he said: "I do not mean  the 
f giving  religious  verdicts  and judgements,  but I mean  the knowledge  of 
Allah Almighty."  Do you think then that he intended  the art of theology  and 
argumentation?
Why should  you not then be eager  to acquire  that knowledge,  nine-tenths  of 
which  vanished  with die death of Umar?  It was he, who closed  the door of 
theology  and argumentation.  He struck  Dabi'  with his stick  when  he raised  to him 
a question  which  gave rise to (the false impression  of) contradiction  between  two 
Holy Verses  in Allah's  Book.  Furthermore,  he had desertion  towards  him, and 
ordered  the people  to desert  him.
As for your statement  that the famous  among  the learned  men are both  
theologists  and jurists,  it should  be known  to you that the reason  for which  one 
becomes  excellent  in the Sight  of Allah  Almighty  is different  from that for which  
one becomes  famous  among  the people.
Abu Bakr As-Siddiq  "Allah  be pleased  with him" was famous  among  the 
people  for his being  the (Prophet's  first) successor,  whereas  he was excellent  in 
the Sight of Allah for that secret  which  resided  in his breast.  Umar "Allah  be 
pleased  with him" was famous  among  the people  for his policy  (of ruling  his 
subjects),  whereas  he was excellent  in the Sight of Allah for his knowledge  of 
Allah,  i.e. that knowledge,  nine-tenths  of which  vanished  by his death,  as well as 
for his intention  to become  much  closer  to (the Presence  of) Allah  Almighty  in 
his ruling,  justice,  and the pity he had towards  Allah's  Creatures;  and of course,  
this is something  inward  in his breast.  One might  imagine  that all the apparent  
deeds stem from him who seeks after the power  of authority,  celebrity,  good  
reputation,  and fame.  In this way, the fame might  be shown  in kingdom,  whereas  
the excellence  in that secret  which  none  knows  (but Allah).
From  this point  of view,  both religious  jurists  and theologists  are like caliphs,  
judges  and men of knowledge.  They are divided  into different  types: there are 
those who intend  Allah Almighty  with their knowledge,  religious  verdicts,  and 
defending  the sunnah  of His Messenger  "Peace  be upon  him",  and seek not after  
good reputation  or showing  off: those  are fitting  for Allah's  Good  Pleasure,  for 
their acting  upon  their knowledge,  intending  the Countenance  of Allah  Almighty  
with their  religious  verdicts  and reflections.
As a matter  of fact, every  (item  of) knowledge  is a deed,  since it is an acquired  
action,  but it is not that every  deed  is (an item of) knowledge.
The physician  (for example)  is able to come  closer  to Allah  Almighty  with his 
knowledge,  and thus, he receives  reward  for his knowledge,  as being  working  
with it for the Sake of Allah  Almighty.
The ruler also intermediates  between  the creatures  just for the Sake of Allah  
Almighty,  and thus he pleases  Allah  Almighty,  and receives  his reward,  not for his 
undertaking  the science  of religion  but for his doing  a job, therewith  he intends46
science  o


Page 49:
Book  One: Knowledge
to come much closer  to (the Presence  of) Allah Almighty  with the help of his 
knowledge.
There  are three divisions  of things,  therewith  one might  become  much  closer  
to (the Presence  of) Allah Almighty:  an abstract  knowledge,  and it is the 
knowledge  of revelation,  an abstract  deed,  and it is the justice  of the ruler,  and his 
adjusting  the people,  and what  is compound  from both deed and knowledge  and 
it is the knowledge  of the way to the hereafter;  and its owner  is one of those  of 
both knowledge  and deeds.
Consider  yourself  where  you will be on the Day of Judgement:  in the party  of 
Allah's  men of knowledge,  or in the party  of His workers,  or in both parties,  with  
the result that you will combine  two shares  with both parties  together.  This is 
more  important  for you than to imitate  (the others)  only for fame,  as it is said in 
the form of a poetic  verse:  "Take  (and learn)  what  you see (clear  and evident  with  
your own eyes) and leave that of which you only hear: of a surety,  in sunrise  
(which  is near) what makes  you independent  from (what  is in) Saturn  (the farthest  
planet  in the solar  system)."
Nevertheless,  we will transmit,  from the biographies  of the earlier  religious  
jurists,  what makes you know that those who claimed  their doctrines  later  
wronged  them, and they will be their greatest  antagonists  on the Day of 
Judgement.  That's  because  those (earlier  jurists)  intended  with their knowledge  
nothing  other  than the Countenance  of Allah  Almighty.
Their  states show,  undoubtedly,  what might  be described  as the signs of the 
learned  men of the hereafter,  as it will be explained  later in the chapter  of "the 
Signs of the learned  men of the hereafter".  They were not devoted  only to the 
science  of jurisprudence  so much  as they were engaged  in the knowledge  of the 
hearts and observing  their states. But they were diverted  from making  
compositions  and teachings  in this field by what diverted  the holy companions  
from making  composidons  and teachings  in the science  of jurisprudence,  even  
though  they were jurists,  and masters  of the science  of religious  verdicts;  and the 
points  and reasons  for that are well-known,  and there is no need to make a 
mendon  of them.
We are going  to mendon  from the states of the earlier  jurists  of Islam  what  
makes you know that it was not they who have been intended  by the 
condemnadon  implied  in what we've mentioned,  but it was those,  who alleged  
that they imitated  them, and claimed  their doctrines,  even though  they were  
different  from them  in their  deeds  and conduct.
The chiefs and leading  pioneers  of jurisprudence,  who have multitudes  of 
followers  in their doctrines  are five: grand  imam  Ash-Shafi'i,  Malik,  Ahmad  Ibn 
Hanbal,  Abu Hanifah,  and Sufyan  Ath-Thawri  "Allah's  Mercy  be upon all of 
them".  Each of them was a righteous  worshipper  and abstinent,  endued  with  
knowledge  of the disciplines  of the hereafter,  a religious  jurist  in the affairs  of the 
people  in this world,  and each intended  only the Countenance  of Allah  AJmighty  
with his knowledge  of jurisprudence.
Although  they had those five characteristics,  the jurists  of this time followed  
their steps only in one, i.e. to go all-out  on making  extremely  unwarranted47


Page 50:
I
The quarter  of the acts of worship
categorizations  and classifications  of the branches  of jurisprudence,  for the 
remaining  four characterisdcs  are not fitting  but for the hereafter,  and it is only  
this characteristic  which  is fitting  for both this world  and the hereafter,  and in 
the hereafter  is intended  by it, it might  be less fitting  for this world.
They  went all-out  for doing  it, and called  in its name,  seeking  to be similar  to 
those five grand  imams;  and how far from the truth it is to compare  the angels  
with the blacksmiths.  Let's now relate from their states  what signifies  those four  
characteristics  (of die hereafter),  even though  their knowledge  of the religious  
jurisprudence  is clearly  apparent.
As for the grand imam Ash-Shafi'i  "Might  Allah bestow  His Mercy  upon  
him",  his being  a sincere  worshipper  is shown  clearly  from  a narradon  according  
to which  he used to divide  the night  into three pordons:  one for knowledge,  one 
for religious  sendee,  and one for sleep.  According  to Ar-Rabie,  Ash-Shafi'i  used  
to recite the Qur'an  in his prayers  in full sixty dmes during  the month  of 
Ramadan.  Al-Buwaiti,  one of his friends,  used to recite the Qur'an to its 
conclusion  once  every  night  during  the month  of Ramadan.
It is reported  that Al-Hassan  Al-Karabisi  said: "I spent  more  than a night  with  
Shafi'i,  and he used to offer  prayer  for nearly  one-third  the night,  during  which,  I 
saw him having  recited  no more than fifty to one hundred  Holy Verses  at 
maximum.  He never came upon a Holy Verse  of mercy  but that he asked for 
Allah's  Mercy  for himself,  all of the Muslims  and the faithful  believers,  and he 
never  came upon a Holy Verse  of punishment  but that he sought  refuge  (with  
Allah  from punishment)  and asked  Allah to deliver  him as well as all the faithful  
believers.
This clarifies  how bodi fear (of Allah's  Punishment)  and hope (for Allah's  
Mercy)  were combined  (in his heart).Consider  how his limiting  the recitation  to 
no more  than fifty Holy  Verses  signifies  the depth  of his versatility  and insight  in 
the secrets  of the Holy  Qur'an!
It is reported  that Shafi'i said: "I've never ate my fill for sixteen  years, for 
indeed,  satiety makes  heavy one's body, hardens  the heart, removes  the trial,  
brings  about  sleep,  and makes  one 
Consider  here his wisdom  of understanding  the defect  of satiety,  and seriousness  
of worship,  for the sake of which  he left it; and to be sure, to reduce  food is the 
commencement  of sendee.
Shafi'i  "might  Allah  bestow  mercy  upon  him" said: "I've never  sworn  by Allah  
Almighty,  whether  truthfully  or falsely."  Consider  here his reverence  and 
veneration  for Allah  Almighty,  and how this indicates  his profound  knowledge  of 
the Majesty  (and Glory)  of Allah  Almighty.
Once,  the grand  imam  Shafi'i  "Allah  be pleased  with him" was asked about  
something  thereupon  he kept silent. It was said to him: "Would  you not give 
(to this question),  might  Allah bestow  His Mercy  upon you?" he said:  
"No,  until 1 know  which  is better:  to keep silent  or to give answer."
Consider  his watch  over his tongue,  even though  it is the most  uncontrollable  
from amongst  the organs  of the body and the most difficult  upon the religi48
case
too weak to undertake  the religious  service."
t
answer
ous
mis


Page 51:
Book  One: Knowledge
jurists  to manage  and curb. This highlights  the fact that in no way did he use to 
speak  or keep silent  but for seeking  after  excellence  and getting  reward.
It is reported  that Ahmad  Ibn Yahya  Ibn Al-Wazir  said: One day, Shafi'i  
out of the market  of Qanadil,  and we followed  him, and behold!  A man was 
abusing  a man
and said: "Hold  back your ears
hold back your tongues  from uttering  it, for indeed,  the hearer acts 
accomplice  of the speaker;  and the wicked  man looks  at the nastiest  thing  in his 
utensil  in order to do his best to empty  it in yours;  and if the wicked  man's  
obscene  word  is ignored,  he who ignores  it will grow  happy  as much  as one who  
utters  it grows  wretched."
According  to the grand imam Shafi'i,  a wise man sent a letter to a sage, in 
which  he said to him: "NO doubt,  you've  been  given  knowledge.  So, pollute  not 
your knowledge  with the darkness  of sins, lest you will be caught  in the darkness  
on the very day those  endued  with knowledge  will march  forward  by the light of 
their knowledge."
As far as his abstinence  is concerned,  Shafi'i  "might  Allah  bestow  mercy  upon  
him" said: "He, who claims to combine  the love for both the world and its 
Creator  (at the same time) has, indeed,  told a lie." According  to Al-Humaidi,  
Shafi'i  "might  Allah  bestow  mercy  upon  him" set out on journey  to Yemen  in the 
company  of a governor,  and he turned away to Mecca  having  ten thousand  
Dirhams.  A tent was pitched  up for him at a certain  place outside  Mecca,  in 
which  the people  came to visit him. However,  he did not leave that place  before  
he had distributed  the whole  money.
One day, on leaving  the public  bath, he gave the bath-keeper  a great amount  
of money.  Once,  his whip fell down  from his hand,  and when  a man raised  it up 
to him, he gave him as many as fifty Dinars  in reward  for his favour.  The 
generosity  of Shafi'i  "might  Allah  bestow  mercy  upon  him" is too famous  to be in 
need of mention.  No doubt,  the generosity  is the commencement  of abstinence,  
for he, who loves a thing keeps it; and only he, who leaves  the wealth  is that in 
whose  sight  the world  is insignificant;  and this is the real concept  of abstinence.
That how Shafi'i "Allah  be pleased  with him" was strong  in his abstinence,  
sincere  in his fear of Allah  Almighty,  and wholehearted  in his occupation  by the 
hereafter,  is clearly shown  from a narration  according  to which Sufyan  Ibn 
Uyainah  related  a Hadith  pertaining  to mystical  sciences  "Raqa'iq",  thereupon  
Shafi'i  fell unconscious.  When  it was said to him that he had died, he said: "If he 
should  die, no doubt,  the best of those  of his time should  have  died."
It is further  narrated  that Abdullah  Ibn Muhammad  Al-Balwi  said: I sat in the 
company  of Umar  Ibn Nubatah,  to discuss  the worshippers  and abstinent,  when  
Umar  said to me: "I've never  seen more pious and more righteous,  and more  
eloquent  than Muhammad  Ibn Idris Ash-Shafi'i.  one day, I, he and Al-Harith  Ibn 
Labid,  a disciple  of As-Saiih  Al-Murri,  set out to Safa. He commenced  the 
recitation  —and he was of a sweet  pleasant  voice-  with the following:  " That will49
came
from those endued  with knowledge.  On that Shafi'i  turned  to us 
from hearing  obscenity  in the same way as you
as an


Page 52:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
be a Day  when  they shall not be able to speak,  Nor will it be open  to them  to put 
forth  pleas."  (Al-Mursalat  35:36)50
3 jjL S/j @) ^ ^
I saw the colour  of (the face of) Shafi'i  "might  Allah  bestow  mercy  upon  him"
troubled  so much  that he fell having  changed,  and his skin trembled  and he was
When  he woke  he said: "O Allah!  I seek refuge  with You from the 
position  of the rejecters  of the truth and the carelessness  of the heedless.  O 
Allah!  To You the hearts  of the Gnostics  have submitted,  and the heads  of those  
who yearn (for Your Meeting)  have bowed  in humiliation.  O my Allah!  Bestow  
upon me from Your Generosity,  and cover  me with Your  Curtain  (therewith  to 
my sins), overlook,  by virtue of the Bounty  of Your Countenance,  my 
indulgence  (in sendee)."  Then  he walked  and we turned  away.
When  I visited  Baghdad,  and he had been in Iraq, I sat on the edge of the 
shore  to perform  ablution  for prayer,  and behold!  A man passed  by me and said:  
"O man! Make  perfect  your ablution,  perchance  Allah  Almighty  would  do well to 
you in the world and the hereafter!"  I turned  and behold!  There was a man  
followed  by a lot of people.  I hastened  to finish  my ablution,  and went  on tracing  
him. He turned  to me and said: "Do you have a need?"  I said: "Yes: would  hat 
you teach  me something  from  what  Allah  Almighty  have taught  you." He said: "It 
should  be known  to you that he, who is true to Allah (in all of his words  and 
deeds) will be delivered,  and he, who fears for his faith will be secure from  
apostasy,  and he, who abstains  from (the delights,  pleasures  and luxuries  of) this 
world,  his eyes will be well-pleased  with such of Allah's  Reward  in the future  as 
he sees. Should  I give you more?"  I answered  in the affirmative,  thereupon  he 
resumed:  "He, who has the following  three characteristics  will indeed  have his 
faith complete:  he, who enjoins  right, and does it, he, who forbids  evil, and 
refrains  from doing it, and he, who guards  well the limits ordained  by Allah  
Almighty.  Should  I not give you more?"  I answered  in the affirmative,  thereupon  
he said: "Abstain  from (the ending  delights  and pleasures  of) this world,  and 
desire  for (the never-ending  bounty  of) the hereafter,  and prove  true to Allah in 
all of your  deeds,  perchance  you will be in the company  of the delivered  ones (on 
the Day of  Judgement)."unconscious.
screen
Then,  he turned  away. I asked  who he was and it was said that he was Ash-  
Shafi'i.  consider  how his falling  unconscious  and giving  admonition  signify  his 
abstinence  and culminating  fear (of Allah Almighty);  and in no way could such  
abstinence  and fear be achieved  but through  the knowledge  of Allah Almighty,  
for indeed,  "it is the men endued  with knowledge,  from amongst  Allah's  Slave  
that fear Allah  most."  (Fatir  28)
^ • jj {jA jA. '~rrJ!5-Vl S*' jf.3 ^
By no means  did Shafi'i  "might  Allah  bestow  mercy  upon  him" reach  such a 
position  of abstinence  and fear (of Allah Almighty)  through  the science  of


Page 53:
Book  One:  Knowledge
payment  in advance,  hiring, and the other sciences  of jurisprudence.  That's  
because  this (knowledge  of Allah) belongs  to the knowledge  of the hereafter,  
taken  from the Holy  Qur'an  and the Prophetic  traditions,  since  the wisdom  of the 
foremost  and last generations  (on earth)  is trusted  in them.
That he is well-versed  in the profound  mysteries  of the heart and the 
knowledge  of (the way to the) hereafter  is shown clearly from the many  
statements  of wisdom  related  from him. It is narrated  that once he was asked  
about  the essence  of showing  off, thereupon  he said intuitively:  "Showing  off is a 
fascinating  thing  of delight,  that is placed  by the inclination  in front  of the eyes of 
the men of knowledge,  and they regard it in accordance  with their poor  
judgement,  thereupon  their  deeds  become  fruitless."
It is reported  that he said also: "If you fear that you might  feel supercilious  
because  of your deed, consider  then of Whom  you should seek the good  
pleasure,  for which reward  you desire,  of which punishment  you should  feel 
afraid,  for which  power  and health  you should  give thanks,  and for which  item of 
trial you should  celebrate  (Allah  Almighty):  if you consider  anyone  of those,  your  
deed will come  to be insignificant  in your sight."  Consider  here how he explained  
the nature  of showing  off, and the treatment  of arrogance,  and both are from  
amongst  the major  defects  of the heart.
It is reported  that Shafi'i  "Allah  be pleased  with him" said: "He,  who does not 
safeguard  himself  (from committing  what is forbidden)  of no benefit  will his 
knowledge  be to him." He "Allah's  Mercy  be upon him" said: "He, who obeys  
Allah with his knowledge,  will get benefit  from its mystery."  He further  said:  
"There  is no one but that he has many  who love him as well as many  who hate  
him. Such being  the case, be in the company  of those who show obedience  to 
Allah  Almighty."
It is reported  that Abd Al-Qahir  Ibn Abd Al-Aziz  was a good pious  man, and 
he used to ask Shafi'i  "Allah  be pleased  with him" many  questions  pertaining  to 
piety, and Shafi'i  used to sit in his company  because  of his piety. One day, he 
asked Shafi'i  "might  Allah bestow  mercy  upon him": "Which  of the following  is 
the best: patience,  trial or well-establishment  in power?"  on that Shafi'i  "might  
Allah bestow  mercy  upon him" said: "The well-establishment  in power  is the 
(best  degree  since  it is the) degree  attained  by the Prophets;  and to be sure,  one is 
not well-established  in power  but after  being  put to trial, and if one is put to trial,  
he should  patiently  persevere,  and if he proves  to be patient,  he then will be well-  
established  in power.  Do you not see 
"Peace  be upon him" to trial and (when he showed  patience)  he was well-  
established  in power?  He Almighty  put Moses  "Peace  be upon  him" to trial and 
(when  he showed  patience)  he was well-established  in power.  He also put Job 
"Peace  be upon him" to trial and (when he showed  patience)  he was well-  
established  in power.  He put Solomon  "Peace  be upon  him" to trial and (when  he 
showed  patience)  he was well-established  in power,  and given  a great dominion.  
Of a surety,  the well-establishment  in power  is the highest  and best degrees,  
according  to the following  statements  of Allah Almighty:  " Thus did we give51
that Allah Almighty  first put Abraham


Page 54:
The quarter  of the acts of worship52
established  power  to Joseph  in the land, to take possession  therein  as, when,  or 
where  he pleased."  (Yusuf  56)
fiil ; lit?-',Cr
Job "Peace  be upon him" also was well-established  in power  after he had 
been put to trial as Allah  Almighty  says: "We removed  the distress  that 
him, and We restored  his people  to him, and doubled  their number,  as a Grace  
from  Ourselves,  and a thing  for commemoration."  (Al-Anbiya  84)was on
a Ql&i  M u >
4 @) OiO^iiU  (^>=>3  iSoaf
This statements  from Ash-ShafTi  signify  his versatility  in the mysteries  of the 
Holy Qur'an,  and acquaintance  with the different  standings  of those who  
followed  the way to Allah Almighty,  from amongst  the Prophets,  Allah's  
Devotees  and good  righteous  men. In reality,  all of this belongs  to the knowledge  
of (the way to the) hereafter.
It is reported  that it was said to Shafi'i:  "When  should  one be a man of 
knowledge?"  he said: "When  he becomes  well-versed  in the sciences  of religion,  
and learnt  them  well, and surveyed  the other  sciences,  and acquired  what he has 
missed  of them.  It is only at this point  that one becomes  a man of knowledge."  
However,  this, and the numerous  statements  likewise  shows clearly  the high  
standing  he attained  in the knowledge  of Allah  Almighty  and the sciences  of the 
(way  to the) hereafter.
That with religious  jurisprudence  and argumentation  thereof  he sought  only  
the Countenance  of Allah  Almighty  is clearly  shown  from the following  narration  
in which  he is reported  to have said: "Would  that all the people  get benefit  from  
that knowledge,  and nothing  of that should  be ascribed  to me." See here how he 
was well-acquainted  with the defect  of knowledge,  and the seeking  for having  
prestige  because  of it, and how he was entirely  far beyond  any concern  with that,  
and how his intention  in being  occupied  by it was devoted  to the Countenance  of 
Allah  Almighty.
It is reported  that Shafi'i  "Allah  be pleased  with him" said: "I've never  debated  
with anyone  and liked that he should  commit  a mistake."  He further  said: "I've  
never  spoken  with anyone  but I liked that he should  be helped  achieve  success,  
directed  to the right, aided (to avoid mistakes)  and be cared,  looked  after and 
safeguarded  by Allah Almighty,  moreover,  I've never spoken  with anyone,  but 
that it was the same  to me that the truth should  be made  clear by Allah  Almighty  
either  on my tongue  or on his tongue."
He further  said: "I've never  brought  about  the truth and proof  against  anyone  
which  he accepted  from me but that I showed  great  respect  and love for him, and 
none has ever felt too arrogant  to concede  to accept  the truth,  and rather  rebelled  
the proof  (even  though  it was right)  but that he became  insignificant  in my eyes,


Page 55:
Book  One:  Knowledge  ----------------------
and I came  to have aversion  towards  him."
Those  are the signs which highlight  his seeking  only Allah Almighty  with  
jurisprudence  and argumentation.  Consider  in this context  how the people  did 
not only emulated  him just in one from  among  those  five characteristics,  but also 
they  opposed  him in it.
For this reason,  it is reported  that Abu Thawr  "Allah's  Mercy  be upon him"  
said: "I've never,  and the people  also have never  seen the like of Shafi'i  "might  
Allah  bestow  mercy  upon  him".  It is reported  that Ahmad  Ibn Hanbal  "Allah  be 
pleased  with him" said: "I've never  offered  a prayer,  for forty years,  but that I 
invoked  good  upon  Shafi'i  "Allah's  Mercy  be upon  him"."
Consider  the fairness  of the invoker,  and the high rank of the one upon him 
he invoked  good,  in comparison  with their counterparts  and likes from amongst  
the learned  men in this dme, and the mutual  feeling  of resentment  and hatred  
between  them, in order to know their indulgence  in their claim of emulating  
those  good  men of knowledge.  Because  of his invoking  good  upon  him so much,  
his (Ahmad  Ibn Hanbal's)  son asked him: "What  source  of men was Shafi'i  in 
order to invoke  good upon him so frequently  as such?"  he said: "O my son! 
Shafi'i  was like the sun for this world,  and the source  of power  and health  for the 
people."  Do you think  then that both could  be compensated?
It is reported  that Ahmad  Ibn Hanbal  "might  Allah  bestow  mercy  upon  him"  
said: "None  has ever touched  an inkpot  (to record  knowledge)  but that he was 
indebted  to Shafi'i."  it is reported  that Yahya  Ibn Sa'id Al-Qatan  said: "I've never  
offered  a prayer,  for forty  years,  but that I invoked  good  upon  Shafi',  in view of 
such of (the gates of) knowledge  as Allah  Almighty  opened  for him, and directed  
him to the right."
Let's limit ourselves  to the pordon  we have related  from the states  of his life, 
for indeed  it (to review  all the states  of his life) is beyond  survey.  However,  we've  
transmitted  the most of those good merits  from the book composed  by grand  
sheikh  Nasr Ibn Ibrahim  Al-Maqdisi  "might  Allah  bestow  mercy  upon him",  in 
the good merits  of Shafi'i  "Allah  Almighty  be pleased  with him, and with all the 
Muslims".
Grand  imam  Malik  "Allah  be pleased  with him" also was adorned  with those  
five characteristics.  It was said to him: "What  do you say, O Malik,  about  seeking  
after knowledge?"  he said: "How  good and fine it is! But consider  that in which  
you are in need from morning  to evening,  to which  you should  stick."
He "Allah's  Mercy  be upon  him" used to treat the science  of religion  with high  
regard, to the extent that whenever  he wanted  to discourse  on Prophetic  
narrations,  he would  perform  ablution,  sit in the front portion  of his bed, comb  
his beard,  and apply perfume  to his body and then sit firmly  with reverence.  
Then,  he would  go on discourse.  When  this matter  was raised  to him he said: "I 
like to highly  exalt the narrations  of the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him"."
It is reported  that Malik said: "No doubt,  knowledge  is a light, which  Allah  
Almighty  places  wherever  He likes; and it is not realized  by the large number  of53


Page 56:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
narrations."  This respect  and appreciation  show  how strong  his knowledge  of the 
Majesty  of Allah  Almighty  was.
That  he intended  with his knowledge  only the Countenance  of Allah  Almighty  
is shown clearly from his statement:  "The quarrel in religion is of no 
significance."  It is also evident  from the statement  of Ash-Shafi'i  about  him: "I 
attendant  with Malik  when forty-eight  questions  were raised  to him, and his 
reply to thirty-two  of them  was: 'I do not know'."  To be sure, it is not easy upon  
who intends  anything  other than the Countenance  of Allah with his 
knowledge  to declare  that he have no knowledge.  For this reason,  Ash-Shafi'i  
said: "When  the men of knowledge  are mentioned,  Malik  stands  for a piercing  
star (in view of his outstanding  excellence),  and I have been indebted  to none  
more  than I was to Malik."
It is narrated  that Abu Ja'far Al-Mansur  prevented  him from relating  the 
narration  of the divorce  under  compulsion,  and when  he sent to him somebody  
to ask him about  it, he related  at presence  of an assembly  of people  that' No 
divorce  is due upon  one who is coerced  to do so'. Although  he lashed  him with  
the whip,  he (Malik)  did not cease  to relate  that narration.
It is reported  that Malik  "might  Allah  bestow  mercy  upon  him" said: "There  is 
no man, who is truthful  in his speech,  and does not tell a lie, but that he 
continues  to get benefit  from his mental  faculty,  and no infirmity  nor dotage  
harms  him because  of decrepitude."
His abstinence  in this world  is evident  from the narration  that Al-Mahdi,  the 
Commander  of the Believers  asked  him: "Have  you got a house?"  he answered  in the 
negative  and said: "But,  let me relate  to you something:  I heard  Rabie'ah  Ibn Abu Abd  
Ar-Rahman  having  said: 'No doubt,  one's  ancestry  is his house."
Later on, Ar-Rashid  (son of Al-Mahdi)  asked him the same question:  "Have  
you got a home?"  he answered  in the negative,  thereupon  he gave him three  
thousand  Dinars  and said to him: "Buy a home  with that (money)."  He took it, 
but spent nothing  of it. When  Ar-Rashid  intended  to return,  he said to Malik  
"might  Allah  bestow  mercy  upon  him":  "You  should  set out with us. Indeed,  I've 
decided  to force  the people  to adhere  to the Muwatta  "the Well-Trodden  path"  in 
the same way as Uthman  "Allah  be pleased  with him" had forced  the people  to 
stick to (his version  of) the Qur'anic  text." He said to him: "As to forcing  the 
people to adhere to the Muwatta',  there is no way to do so, for the holy  
companions  of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him"  
were dispersed  after his death in different  regions,  and related  the Prophetic  
narrations,  and thus, the inhabitants  of each region  have a different  portion  of 
that knowledge.  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon  
him" said in this respect  (according  to the narration  of Al-Baihaqi  on the 
authority  of Ibn Abbas):  "No doubt,  the variation  of opinions  among  my nation  
(pertaining  to the branches,  and not the foundations  of religion)  is (a gift of) 
mercy  (for them)."  As for my setting  out with you, there  is no way to do so, since  
the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said (on the 
authority  of Sufyan  Ibn Abu Zuhair):  "Of a surety,  Medina  is much  better  for54
was
one


Page 57:
1
Book  One: Knowledge  
them (to live in) if they knew!"  he "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him"  
further  said (on the authority  of Abu Hurairah):  "Medina  removes  its impurities,  
in the same  way as the bellows  remove  the dross  of iron."  Here are your Dinars  
as they are (with  nothing  spent  out of it): take it if you so like, or leave  it if you so 
like." He means  that 'you force  me to leave  Medina  for what  you've  given to me, 
and in no way should  I give preference  to this world over the City of the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him".  This was Malik's  
abstinence  in this world.55
When  wealth  in great abundance  was brought  to him from different  parts of 
the world,  because  of the dissemination  of his knowledge  and dispersion  of his 
companions,  he spent them in all sides of good; and as a matter  of fact, his 
generosity  clearly  reveals  his absdnence  in, and lukewarm  liking  for this world.  
However,  the abstinence  is not only to abandon  wealth,  but it is also to have no 
desire  in the heart  for it. In spite of his dominion,  (the Prophet)  Solomon  "Peace  
be upon  him" was from  among  the abstinent  men.
However,  Malik's  disregard  for this world is shown  from the narration  of 
Shafi'i  "Allah  be pleased  with him": "I saw near the gate of the house  of Malik  
many  horses  from those belonging  to Khurasan,  or Egypt  according  to another  
narration,  better  than which  I've never  seen."  I said to Malik:  "How  good those  
are!" he said: "All of this is a gift for you O Abu Abdullah."  I said to him: "Keep  
for you at least a riding  mount  to ride." He said: "I feel shy of Allah Almighty  to 
trample  an earth, in which there is the body of the Prophet  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him" with the hoof  of a riding  mount."  Consider  his 
great generosity,  revealed  from his giving  that all at once as a gift, and his great  
respect  for the earth  of Medina.
That he intended  with his knowledge  only the Countenance  of Allah  Almighty  
is clear from the following  narration,  which  shows  also how he looked  down  
upon this world:  he said: "I visited  Harun  Ar-Rashid  who said to me: "O Abu  
AbdulJah!  You should  come to visit us regularly,  in order that our boys should  
listen to (the narrations  of) Muwatta'  from  you."  I said: "might  Allah  honour  our 
master,  the Commander  of Believers!  You are the source  of this knowledge:  if 
you honour  it, it will be exalted,  and if you dishonour  it, it will be put to 
humiliation.  To be sure, it is the people  who should  come  to acquire  knowledge,  
and it is not that knowledge  should  come to them (while they are at their  
homes)."  On that he said: "You've  told the truth. Come  out to the mosque,  in 
order  to listen  (to Malik)  with the public."
As for Abu Hanifah  "might  Allah  Almighty  bestow  mercy  upon  him" he also 
righteous  worshipper  of Allah Almighty,  ascetic,  knowledgeable  of Allah was a
Almighty,  afraid of Him, and he intended  only the Countenance  of Allah  
Almighty  with his knowledge.
That he was a righteous  worshipper  of Allah is shown  from the narration  
according  to which  Ibn Al-Mubarak  said: "Abu Hanifah  "Allah  might  bestow  
him" was characterized  by manliness  and performance  of a great mercy  upon  
amount  of prayers."


Page 58:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
It is narrated  that Hammad  Ibn Abu Sulaiman  said that Abu Hanifah  used to 
give life to the whole  night (by supererogatory  prayers  and celebration  of Allah  
Almighty).  It is also narrated  that he used to give life to half  of the night,  and 
day, he came  upon  a street,  and a man pointed  to him while  he walking,  and said 
to another:  "This  is die man who always  give life to the whole  night."  From  this 
time on, he came  to give life to the whole  night.  He said pertaining  to that: "I feel 
shy of Allah  Almighty  to be described  with something  of service  I do not do."
As for his abstinence,  it is narrated  that Ar-Rabie  Ibn Asim said: "Yazid  Ibn 
Umar  Ibn Hubairah  sent me to bring  Abu Hanifah  to him, and when  I brought  
him he asked him to be die governor  of die treasury,  but he rejected,  thereupon  
he gave him twenty  lashes."  Consider  how he fled away from the office of 
governorship  of treasury,  and instead  he endured  the punishment
Al-Hakam  Ibn Hisham  Ath-Thaqafi  said: I was reported  pertaining  to Abu  
Hanifah,  while being  in Sham,  that he was of the most trustworthy  among  the 
people,  and the governor  liked him to be in charge  of the treasury,  odierwise,  he 
would  strike him on his back. However,  he preferred  their punishment  (in this 
world)  to the punishment  of Allah  (in the hereafter).
It is narrated  that a mention  was made  of Abu Hanifah  in the presence  of Ibn 
Al-Mubarak.  He said: "Do you make a mention  of a man, to whom  this world  
with all of its contents  was offered  to him, and he ran away  from  it?"
It is narrated  on the authority  of Muhammad  Ibn Shuja' from one of his 
companions  that it was said to Abu Hanifah:  "Abu Ja'far Al-Mansur,  the 
Commander  of the Believers,  ordered  that ten thousand  Dirhams  be given to 
you." But Abu Hanifah  was not satisfied."  When  it was the very day, on which  he 
expected  to receive  the money,  he offered  the Morning  prayer  and wrapped  
himself  with his garment,  and kept silent. The courier of Al-Hassan  Ibn 
Qahtabah  came to him with the money,  and when he entered  into him, he did 
not talk to him. One of the attendants  said: "It is his habit not to talk to us but 
with a word  in reply to a word."  He said: "Place  the money  in this bag in one of 
the corners  of the house."  Afterwards,  Abu Hanifah  made a bequest  of the 
furniture  of his house,  and said to his son: "When  I die and you finish from the 
burial ceremonies,  take this heap (of money)  and go with it to Al-Hassan  Ibn 
Qahtabah  and said to him: "Here  is your trust which  you've  trusted  with Abu  
Hanifah."  His son said: I did accordingly,  thereupon  Al-Hassan  said: "Allah's  
Mercy  be upon  your father!  How  zealous  he was on his religion!"
It is narrated  that he was invited  to take the office  of judge,  thereupon  he said:  
"I'm not fitting  for that."  He was asked:  "Why?"  he said: "If I'm truthful,  then, (I 
know  for certain  that) I'm not fitting  for that; and if I'm a liar, then, of a surety,  
by no means  should  a liar be fitting  for the office  of judge."
As for his acquaintance  with the way to the hereafter,  and the matters  of 
religion,  as well as his knowledge  of Allah  Almighty,  this is attested  from his great  
fear of Allah Almighty,  and refraining  from (the pleasures  and delights  of) this 
world.  According  to Ibn Juraij, "I was reported  from this man of yours,  An- 
Nu'man  Ibn Thabit,  who belongs  to Kufah  that he was solemnly  afraid  of Allah56
one


Page 59:
Book  One:  Knowledge
Almighty."  According  to Sharik  An-Nakh'i,  "Abu Hanifah  was on the habit of 
spending  long in silence,  deep contemplation,  even though  his conversations  to 
the people  were  little."
This is from amongst  the clear signs of his acquaintance  with the esoteric  
knowledge,  and occupation  by the serious  matters  of the religion;  for indeed,  he, 
who is gifted  with (the privilege  of) spending  long time in silence  and abstinence  
has been  given  the whole  knowledge.
The good merits  of Abu Hanifah  are beyond  calculation.  Had he not been  
characterized  by perseverance  in self-humiliation  and had he not dipped  into the 
sea of contemplation?  Had he not, throughout  a period  of forty-three  years,  
performed  his morning  prayer  without  breaking  his evening  ablutions  (because  of 
spending  the whole  night  in supererogatory  prayer)?  Had he not performed  Hajj 
fifty-five  times  and seen  Allah  in his sleep  a hundred  times?
This is but a little portion  of the lives of the three  grand  imams,  Shafi'i,  Malik  
and Abu Hanifah.  As for both Ahmad  Ibn Hanbal  and Sufyan  Ath-Thawri,  their  
followers  are less in number  than theirs,  and those  of Sufyan  are lesser  than those  
of Ahmad,  even though  they are more famous  for piety  and abstinence.  Since  this 
book,  along  its different  parts,  is filled  with narrations  about  their  lives,  there  is no need  
to take up their  lives in more  detail  now  in this stage.57
It is more  relevant  to consider  the states  and lives of those  three  grand  imams,  
and see if those  states,  sayings,  deeds  for which  they refrained  from (the delights  
and pleasures  of) this world and wholeheartedly  devoted  themselves  to the 
service  of Allah  Almighty  are the fruits of only the knowledge  of the branches  of 
jurisprudence,  like the sciences  of payment  in advance,  hiring,  Zihar,  Li'an, Ila* 
(swearing  to become  aloof  from  one's  wives),  or of another  kind of knowledge  of 
greater  superiority  and higher  rank. Consider  also whether  those who claimed  
they had emulated  the three  grand  imams  were or were  not true to their  claim.
CHAPTER  THREE:  ON SUCH  OF SCIENCES  
AS POPULARLY  THOUGHT  TO BE PRAISEWORTHY
Even though  they are not so
This chapter  deals with the point for which  a certain  knowledge  might  be 
considered  as blameworthy
and the way of changing  the names  of such sciences  as Fiqh (the faculty  of 
religious  understanding),  Ilm (knowledge),  Tawhid  (Allah  s Oneness),  Dhikr  
(celebration  of Allah  Almighty),  and Hikmah  (wisdom)
and the extent  to which the legal sciences  might  be praiseworthy  and the 
extent  to which  they might  be blameworthy
The Exposition  Of The Reason  For Criticizing  
Such Of Those  As Blameworthy
you might  exclaim:  "Since  knowledge  is to be acquainted  with a certain  thing  
as it is really  is, and it is an essential  characteristic  of Allah  Almighty:  then, how  
should  a thing  be knowledge,  and blameworthy  at the same  time?


Page 60:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
it should  be known  to you that by no means  would  the knowledge  be regarded  
as blameworthy  for its being  knowledge  so much  as it is held blameworthy  in the 
sight  of die people  for one of three  reasons:
the first: that it leads to damage,  which  befalls  either  its doer or anyone  else,  
like the science  of magic  and talismans,  which  is regarded  as blameworthy,  and it 
is really  so, for the Holy  Qur'an  affirms  that as being  a cause  of sowing  the seeds  
of discord  between  spouses.  Furthermore,  (according  to the narradon  of A'ishah)  
the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" was bewitched  and he grew ill 
because  of that and remained  as such until Gabriel  "Peace  be upon  him" told him 
about  it, thereupon  he brought  the material  on which  the magic  was done from  
underneath  a stone  in the well (of Dharwan  according  to Bukhari's  narradon).
Magic  is something  obtained  from the knowledge  of the properties  of the 
precious  stones  and mathematical  calculations  particular  to the rising  points  of 
the stars. A skeleton  resembling  the person  to be bewitched  is made  out of these  
precious  stones,  which is gazed into, in addition  to repeated  utterances  of 
unbelief  and obscenity,  which  are contrary  to law, in expectation  for a special  
time in the rising of the stars, Through  which  the aid of the devils becomes  
accessible,  with the result that, in accordance  with the ordinance  of Allah  
Almighty,  the bewitched  one becomes  vulnerable  to strange  states.
As far as the knowledge  of these things  is concerned,  it is not blameworthy.  
But even,  it is of no use except  for harming  people.  The instrument  of evil is in 
itself  evil, and it is for this reason  that magic  is regarded  as blameworthy.  If a 
person  should  pursue  one of the holy devotees  of Allah  in order  to kill him, but 
such saint should  hide in a safe place  and, then, the oppressor  inquires  about  the 
saint's  location  it would  not be permissible  to disclose  his hiding  place,  but rather,  
to tell a lie in this respect  would  be incumbent.  For while  disclosing  the location  
of the saint is, in itself, a knowledge  of the fact as it is, nevertheless  it is 
blameworthy  because  it brings  about  harm.
The second:  that it causes  harm  to its doer at most,  like astronomy,  which  is 
not blameworthy  in itself.  It is of two parts:
One is computational  to which the Holy Qur'an  refers in telling  that the 
course  of both the sun and the moon  is computed:  "The sun and the moon  
follow  courses  (exactly)  computed."  (Ar-Rahman  5)58
4 ^
He further  says: " And the Moon,  We have measured  for it mansions  (to 
traverse)  till it returns  like the old (and withered)  lower  part of a date-stalk."  (Ya 
Sin 39)
4 0>?v*h^  Sip ^
The other  is astrology  the essence  of which  is to attest  the future  events  from  
the present  causes.  This is similar  to the way a physician  is guided  by the patient ’s 
pulse to predict  the future  development  of a disease.  Astrology  is therefore  an 
attempt  to know  the course  of the laws and ordinances  of Allah  relative  to His 
creatures.  But the law has regarded  it as blameworthy.


Page 61:
Book  One:  Knowledge
In this context,  (it is narrated  by Tabarani  on the authority  of Ibn Mas'ud)  that 
the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: “When  the Divine  decree  is 
mentioned,  withhold  (from being engaged  in discourses  about  that); when the 
stars are mentioned,  desist  (from  talking  about  them);  and when  my Companions  
are mentioned,  refrain  (from  abusing  them). ”
It is further  narrated  (by Ibn Abd Al-Barr  on the authority  of Abu Mihjan)  
that the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "After  my death,  I fear 
three things  for my nation:  (to be victims  of) the injustice  and wrongness  of the 
rulers,  to have faith in the stars,  and to belie the Divine  Decree."
It is further  narrated  that Umar Ibn Al-Khattab  "Allah  be pleased  be with  
him" said: "Learn  from astronomy  what is sufficient  for you to guide through  
land and sea and then you should  stop (from  learning  more)."
However,  he warned  against  it for three  reasons:
One is that it causes  harm to most of the creatures:  if they are revealed  that 
those events  result from the course  of certain  stars, they will have the false  
impression  that it is the stars which  lead to that, as being  directing  gods,  for they  
are glorious  celestial  bodies.  In this way, they will have a great impact  upon the 
people,  whose  hearts  (and minds)  will come  to be attached  to them.  Furthermore,  
they will think that both good and evil are withheld  by or expected  only from  
them,  which  leads to the vanishing  of the celebration  of Allah from the heart.  
That's  because  a weak-minded  person  fails to see what  is beyond  the media;  and 
only the learned  one who is well-established  in knowledge  knows,  for certain,  that 
the sun, the moon  and the stars are subdued  by the Command  of Allah  Almighty.
The example  of the way a weak-minded  one sees that sunlight  results  from  the 
rising  of the sun is like the example  of an ant, as if it is gifted  with reason,  and it 
happens  to stand on the surface  of a sheet of paper, thereupon  it sees the 
movement  in the process  of writing,  thinking  that it is the work of the pen, but 
by no means  would  it go beyond  that to see the fingers,  and behind  the fingers  
the hand, and behind  the hand the will which  moves  it, and behind  the will a 
scribe  who has the ability  and will (to write what he likes),  and behind  all, the 
Creator  of the hand,, the ability,  and the will. Most people  fail to look beyond  the 
nearby  and earthly  causes  and they hardly  promote  to grasp the Cause  of all causes.  
This is one of the reasons  why  astrology  has been  forbidden.
The other  is that the astrology  is merely  guessing,  and as far as an ordinary  
man is concerned,  the influence  of the stars could hardly  be determined  either  
with certainty  or even with probability.  Its related judgements  result from  
ignorance.  In this way, astrology  is regarded  as blameworthy  in reference  to this 
ignorance,  not because  it is knowledge.
Furthermore,  it is narrated  that this knowledge  was a miracle  given  as a gift to 
the Prophet  Idris "Peace  be upon him" ((from  Allah Almighty  to confirm  his 
Prophethood).  But now, it has vanished  and totally  disappeared.  If the astrologer  
happens  to be correct  in some cases, and how rare they are, this will be by 
chance.  He may happen  to have knowledge  of some causes,  but the effect  will 
not result  therefrom  unless  several  other  conditions,  whose  realities  are beyond59


Page 62:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
the reach of human  beings,  should  be accomplished.  If he happened  to be 
doomed  by Allah to have knowledge  of the remaining  causes,  his prediction  
would  come  true; but if that is not achieved,  he would  go wrong.
This is similar  to the guess  of a man who is moved  to think  that there  will be 
rain this day on seeing  the clouds  gathering  and rising  from the mountain  tops.  
Although  rain may actually  fall, it is also possible  that a hot sun should  rise and disperse  
the clouds.  The mere presence  of clouds  in the sky is not sufficient  for rain to come  
down;  and there  are other  conditions  which  cannot  be determined.
Similarly,  the navigator  guesses  that the ship will sail safely depending  only  
the usual conduct  of the winds with which  he is familiar.  But there are60
upon
unknown  factors  which control  the movements  of the winds of which the
navigator  might  have no knowledge.  Consequendy,  his guess would  somedmes  
be correct  and sometimes  wrong.  For this reason,  even the strong-minded  one is 
forbidden  to practise  astrology.
The third  reason  is that it is of no use. The least to be said about  it is that it 
is, at its best, to invade  what  is useless,  in which  one might  waste  his life, which  is 
his most  valuable  property;  and to be sure, this is the greatest  loss.
In this connection,  (it is narrated  by Ibn Abd Al-Barr  on the authority  of Abu  
Hurairah)  that once, the Messenger  of Allah came upon a man, having  a 
gathering  of people  round  him, thereupon  he asked: "Who  is that?" they said:  
"He is a knowledgeable  man?"  he said: "Which  knowledge  has he got?" they said:  
"Poetry  and ancestries  of Arabs."  On that he said: "This  knowledge  brings  about  
no benefit,  and the ignorance  of it causes  no harm."  The Messenger  of Allah  
"Peace  be upon  him" added:  "The knowledge  (which  one should  learn)  is a Holy  
Verse  whose  meaning  is well-established  (or according  to another  interpretation,  
a clear  sign which  is evident),  an item of standing  sunnah,  or a just ordinance."
To middle  into astrology  then is to intrude  what is dangerous,  and fall into 
ignorance,  with no benefit  to be expected.  What  will be doomed  to happen  will 
inevitably  come true, and there is no way to avoid  it, unlike  medicine,  in which  
there is need, and its proofs  could be attested,  or even the interpretation  of 
dreams,  for, though  being a guess work, it is a part of forty-six  parts of 
Prophethood,  and there  is no danger  expected  from  it.
The third is that whoever  middles  into this kind of knowledge  gets no 
scientific  benefit  from  it; and that's because  it is blameworthy  in itself. It is just 
like learning  the insignificant  before  the important  or the ambiguous  before  the 
evident  of sciences,  or research  of the Divine  Mysteries,  undertaken  by both  
philosophers  and theologians,  even though  they could hardly  grasp them in full 
for none is fitting  for knowing  their realities  and ways barring  the Prophets  and 
saints.  For this reason,  the people  should  be held back from pursuing  them,  and 
rather diverted  to only those permitted  by law, for this is satisfactory  for 
guidance.  Many  were the persons  who delved  into sciences,  with the result  that 
they were harmed  because  of that; and had they not done so, they would  have  
been far better  in the science  of religion.
The fact that knowledge  might be harmful  to some people  could not bei


Page 63:
Book  One: Knowledge  
rejected,  just in the same  way as an infant  might  be harmed  by the flesh of birds  
and the variety  of sweet  edible  things.  Furthermore,  the ignorance  of some  affairs  
might  be of good  benefit  for many  persons.
In this respect,  it is narrated  that a man made  a complaint  to a physician  of the 
infertility  of his wife, and her failure  to give birth to children.  The physician  
detected  her pulse and said to her: "You needn't  medicine  for fertility,  for you 
will die within  forty  days as attested  from  your pulse."  Consequendy,  the woman  
entertained  great fear and she was perturbed.  She brought  out her property  and 
distributed  it (among  the poor and needy)  and made her bequest  in reladon  to 
that, and spent  with no food nor drink  until the appointed  term came to its end 
but even she did not die. Her husband  came to the physician  and told him that 
she had not died. He said: "I know  that. Have sexual  relation  with her now, and 
she will be pregnant."  When  the man asked  him about  the reason  he said: "I saw 
her overweight  to the extent  that fat gathered  around  the mouth  of her womb,  
and I came to know  that she would  not become  lean unless  she entertained  the 
fear of death,  thereupon  I frightened  her with that until she grew  lean, and thus  
the obstruction  of pregnancy  vanished."
This draws your attention  to the danger  of many sciences,  and makes  you 
grasp the meaning  of the statement  of the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  
him" (according  to the narration  of Ibn Abd Al-Barr  on the authority  of Jabir):  
"We seek refuge  with  Allah  from (having)  knowledge  which  is of no benefit."
You should  then take lesson  and admonition  from this narration,  and pursue  
not such of sciences  as held blameworthy  by law, and rather  emulate  the holy  
companions  (of the Prophet)  "Allah  be pleased  with them",  and be satisfied  with  
following  the right  way of sunnah,  since safety  lies in following  (the steps of the 
Messenger  and his companions),  whereas  danger  lies in adventure  and aberration.  
You should  also not blow  your own horn so much  of what  you describe  as your  
opinion,  reasonable  judgement,  proof  and evidence,  with the claim that you 
investigate  into things  in order to know  and determine  their realities  as they are 
putting  in mind  that there  is no harm  in the pursuit  of knowledge.  To be sure, the 
harm  it might  cause  to you is more dangerous  (than  whatever  benefit  you could  
get). Many  are the things  which  you might  know,  whose  knowledge  would  ruin 
you in the hereafter,  unless  Allah  Almighty  intervenes  for you with His Mercy.
It should  be known  to you that as well as physicians  know  secrets  of medical  
treatments,  deemed  improbable  by those  who are not well-versed  in medicine,  so 
do the Prophets,  who are the physicians  of hearts  and have knowledge  of the 
rules that govern  the hereafter  life. So, do not judge  their  ways  in accordance  with  
your  limited  reason,  lest you would  be ruined.
Not rarely  a person's  finger  might  be injured,  and, following  his own mind,  he 
might  apply  ointment  to it, until a skillful  physician  would  draw his attention  to 
the fact that his treatment  should  be to apply  ointment  to the other  side of the 
palm,  which  he would  deem  far improbable,  in view of his ignorance  of the way 
the nerves  branch,  and from which  places  in the body they spring,  and gather  
around  the body.  The same  is true of the way to the hereafter,  and the right  ways61


Page 64:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
and etiquette  of law, and the beliefs  set for the people  to follow,  therein  lie many  
niceties  and fine points,  which  are beyond  the capacity  and power  of the human  
mind to grasp. Similarly,  there are wonderful  qualities  in the properties  of the 
precious  stones  which  experts  have failed to understand,  to the extent  that no 
one has been able to realize  (for example)  the reason  why the magnet  attracts  
iron.62
Nevertheless,  the wonderful  and strange  things  in faith and works  and their  
advantage  for the purity,  cleanliness,  integrity,  and rectitude  of the heart  in order  
to be fitting  for rising  up to the neighbourhood  of Allah,  and become  exposed  to 
the breeze  of His Bounty,  are far more numerous  and greater  than those in 
therapies  and drugs. As well as minds might fail to know the benefits  of 
medicines  and drugs, even though  they are realized  through  experimentation,  
minds  also fail to know  the things  which  are useful  for the hereafter  life, putting  
in consideration  that there  is no way to determine  them  through  experimentation.  
That's  because  these things  would  be attainable  through  experimentation  only if 
some of the dead would  return  and tell us about  such of deeds  as are acceptable  
and useful  in the sight of Allah,  and bring  man much  closer  to Him,  and such of 
deeds  as estrange  the creature  from his Creator;  and the same  is true of faith. But 
unfortunately,  in no way is this to be expected.
For this reason,  it suffices  you for benefit  that your mind should  guide  you to 
the truthfulness  of Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" and make plain to 
you the significance  of his counsel.  Put aside from your conduct  the deviation  of 
your  mind (from  its limits)  and stick to obedience,  for nothing  else would  deliver  
you.
For this reason,  (it is narrated  by Abu Dawud  on the authority  of Buraidah  
that) the Prophet  "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: “No doubt,  
ignorance  lies in some forms  of knowledge,  and incoherence  lies in some forms  
of (eloquent)  speech."  It is a well-known  fact that by no means  could knowledge  be 
ignorance,  but it may  have  the same  harmful  influence  as ignorance.
(It is further  narrated  on die authority  of Abu Ad-Darda'  that) The Prophet  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: “A little portion  of divine  
guidance  is far better  than a great  amount  of knowledge. ”
Jesus "Peace  be upon him" said: “Many  are the trees, but not all are fruitful;  
plentiful  are the fruits,  but not all are edible;  (similarly)  many  are the branches  of 
knowledge,  but not all are useful. ”
§The Way Of Changing  The Names  OF SCIENCES
It should  be known  that the source  of confusion  of the blameworthy  sciences  
with the legal sciences  is the alteration  and distortion  of the names of the 
praiseworthy  sciences,  for evil purposes,  which have been given concepts  
extremely  different  from those intended  for them by the good righteous  
and those of the first generation.  Those are five terms: Fiqh  
(jurisprudence),  Ilm (science of religion),  Tawhid (monotheism),  Dhikr  
(admonition),  and Hikmah  (philosophy).ancestors


Page 65:
Book  One:  Knowledge  ---------------- ------------------
Those  are praiseworthy  terms and the men who  
them are those of high posidons  in the science  of religion.  But now they have  
been  altered  and given  blameworthy  concepts,  but the hearts  are reluctant  to hold  
at fault those  characterized  by any of them,  in view of the widespread  pracdce  of 
applying  these  names  to them  alike.
The first term  stands  for Fiqh (jurisprudence),  which  they have altered  more  
by restricdon  and pardcularizadon  than by altering  its meaning.  They  have given  
it the restricted  meaning  of acquaintance  with the strange  cases of religious  
verdicts,  the mastery  of the nicedes  of their origins  and reasons,  so much  
discourse  in that field,  and retention  of their related  articles.  In this way, the most  
versatile  in jurisprudence  among the people is he who has the deepest  
acquaintance  with that, and spends  the longest  time in occupation  by it.
During  the first age (of the holy companions),  the name jurisprudence  was 
given  to the knowledge  of the way to the hereafter,  and the acquaintance  with the 
niceties  of the defects  of souls and the things,  which  spoil the deeds,  the grasp  of 
the inferiority  of (the delights  and pleasures  of) this world,  and looking  forward  
to the blessings  of the hereafter  and the domination  of fear over the heart.  This is 
attested  from the following  statement  of Allah Almighty:  "if a contingent  from  
every expedition  remained  behind,  they could devote  themselves  to studies  in 
religion,  and admonish  the people  when  they return  to them."  (At-Tawbah  122)
i 1&-J  6j a l>fei  ***&  \
To be sure,  it is this kind of religious  study  which  brings  about  fear and alarm  
in the soul, apart from such detailed  branches  as the science  of emancipation,  
divorce,  Li'an,  payment  in advance,  hiring.  No alarm  nor fear could  be produced  
by those branches.  Nevertheless,  the wholehearted  devotion  to practicing  it 
always  hardens  the heart,  and deprive  it of piety,  as we see now those  who devote  
themselves  only to this practice.
Allah Almighty  further  says: "they have hearts  wherewith  they understand  
not, eyes wherewith  they see not, and ears wherewith  they hear not." (Al-A'raf  
179)63
characterized  by any of are
4. ^ ^ bjL^  ^ ^
He refers here to the significance  of faith, and not the practice  of giving  
religious  verdicts.  By my life, the term Fiqh, from the linguistic  point  of view,  
stands  for the faculty  of understanding.  They  are used with both the ancient  and 
modern  connotations.  Consider  Allah's  statement:  " Of a truth you are stronger  
(than they) because  of the terror  in their hearts,  (sent) by Allah.  This is because  
they  are men devoid  of understanding."  (Al-Hashr  13)
He thus attributed  their little fear of AUah  and their  great  terror  of the power  
of man to their weak understanding.  Judge,  by yourself,  whether  this was the 
result of the lack of acquaintance  with the details  of religious  verdicts  or the 
result  of the disappearance  of those  sciences  we have  already  mentioned.


Page 66:
The quarter  of the acts of worship64
(It is narrated  by Abu Na'im  on the authority  of Suwaid  Ibn Al-Harith  that)  
the Prophet  "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said, addressing  the 
members  of the delegate  who came to visit him: ‘ They are Learned,  wise and 
discerning. ” When Sa'id Ibn Ibrahim  Az-Zuhri  was asked about the greatest  
jurisprudent  among  Medina's  inhabitants,  he said: The most Allah-fearing  
ong them."  He seemed  to have referred  to the fruit of jurisprudence;  and to be 
Allah-fearingness  is the fruit of the esoteric  science,  and not the science  of 
giving  religious  verdicts  and passing  judgements.
(It is narrated  by Ibn Abd Al-Barr  on the authority  of Ali that) the Messenger  
of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "Should  I not tell you about the greatest  
jurisprudent  among  the people?"  they said: "Yes."  He said: It is he, who does  
make the people  despair  of Allah's  Mercy,  nor does he cause them to feel 
secure  against  Allah's  schemes,  nor does he make them lose hope of Allah  s 
Spirit,  nor does he leave  the Qur'an  in favour  of anything  else."
the authority  of Anas Ibn Malik  that) The  
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: “To sit with a 
people  who are celebrating  (the Praises  of) Allah Almighty  from the Morning  
prayer  up to the rising  of the sun is much  dearer  to me than to emancipate  four  
slaves  from the offspring  of Ishmael;  and to sit with people  who are celebrating  
(the Praises  of) Allah  Almighty  from  the Asr prayer  up to the setting  of the sun is 
much  dearer  to me than to emancipate  four slaves."
When  Anas related  this narration,  he turned  to both Zaid Ar-Raqashi  and 
Ziyad An-Numairi  and said to them: "The gatherings  of celebration  (of Allah  
Almighty)  were not like those  of yours,  in which  one of you relates  his preachings  
and narrates  traditions  to his companions.  On the contrary,  we used to sit in a 
gathering,  remember  the (principles  and deeds of) faith, learn the Qur'an,  
understand  religion,  and calculate  Allah's Favours  upon us, out of studying  
religion.  In this way, he gave the name of religious  study to both learning  the 
Qur'an  and calculating  Allah's  Favours  (upon  His creatures).
(It is further  narrated  by Ibn Abd Al-Barr  on the authority  of Shaddad  Ibn 
Aws that) the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "One would  not 
come to be fully jurisprudent  until he dislikes  the people  only for the sake of 
Allah,  and sees a lot of meanings  in the Qur'an",  and then (according  to the 
narration  of Abu Ad-Darda',  whose chain of transmission  is short of the 
Prophet)  turns  to himself,  and hates  it more (for the same  reason)."
When  Farqad  As-Sabakhi  asked  Al-Hassan  about  something,  and he gave him 
reply,  he said to him: "But the jurisprudents  differ  with you in that matter."  On 
that he said: "Might  your mother  be bereaved  of you O Furaiqid!  Have  you 
a real jurisprudent  with your own eyes? To beam
sure,
not
(It is narrated  by Abu Dawud  on
seen
sure, the real jurisprudent  is he, 
who abstains  from (the delights  and pleasures  of) this world,  seeks after the 
hereafter,  who is well-versed  in the matters  of his religion,  who is on the habit  of 
worshipping  his Lord regularly,  who is pious, who withholds  himself  from  
attacking  the reputations  of the Muslims,  refrains  from (having  his hand reach)  
their  property,  and who is sincere  in his advice  to their  group."


Page 67:
65 Book  One: Knowledge
He did not say, in all of what  he said, that he is the one who has mastery  over  
all the branches  of religious  verdicts.  But I do not say that the name  jurisprudent  
was given to giving  religious  verdicts  or passing  judgements.  Nevertheless,  this 
was either in a general  and broad manner  or by way of regarding  the one a 
subdivision  of the other.  But its application  to the science  of the hereafter  was 
more common.  Consequently,  this restriction  brought  forth some ambiguity  
which caused  men to devote themselves  solely to it to the neglect  of the 
knowledge  of the hereafter  and the nature  of the heart.
Furthermore,  they were encouraged  to some extent by the fact that the 
esoteric  knowledge  is ambiguous,  and putting  it to practice  is very difficult;  and it 
is not easy to attain  therewith  the high offices  of government,  judge,  wealth  and 
power  of authority.  This (the negligence  of the hereafter)  was made  alluring  by 
Satan to the hearts,  through  making  particular  the name of jurisprudence  (to 
connote  only the sciences  of religious  verdicts  and judgements  on the exclusion  
of the knowledge  of the way to the hereafter),  despite  the fact that it has been  
really  held praiseworthy  by law.
The second  term stands  for Ilm (science  of religion),  which  has been given  
to the knowledge  of Allah  Almighty,  His Signs,  Acts pertaining  to His devotees  
and creatures,  to the extent  that when Umar  Ibn Al-Khattab  died, Ibn Mas'ud  
"Allah  be pleased  with him" said: "No doubt,  nine-tenth  the science  of religion  
died."  He designated  this knowledge  as the science,  with the definite  article  and 
explained  it as the knowledge  of Allah  Almighty.  They  also altered  its concept  by 
more restriction  until it came to be ascribed  only to those who are engaged  in 
argumentation  with his opponents  about  the problems  of jurisprudence  and the 
like of that. It is said about  such that he is knowledgeable  of the truth,  versatile  in 
knowledge,  while those  who do not practice  that nor take it up are referred  to 
among  the weak, and are not considered  to belong  to the company  of the 
knowledgeable.  This also is alteration  by restriction.
But the most part of what is related  in relation  to the good merits  of the 
learned  men is attributed  to those  endued  with knowledge  of Allah  Almighty,  His 
rules of ordinance,  acts and attributes.  But even,  it has now become  usual to be 
applied  to those  who do not comprehend  from the science  of the law more  than  
controversial  syllogisms  on disputed  cases.  Those  well-versed  in such gymnastics  
are now regarded  among  the versatile  learned  men,  in spite of their ignorance  of 
the sciences  of interpretation,  tradition  and religion,.  This,  as a result,  has proved  
destructive  to a great  number  of knowledge  seekers.
The third  term stands  for Tawhid  (Monotheism),  which  has now turned  to 
mean  the art of scholastic  theology,  versatility  in the way of argumentation,  and 
grasping  the different  methods  of contradicting  the adversaries,  and the capacity  
of being  diffuse  in speech,  by raising  a great  variety  of questions,  and arousing  so 
much suspicions,  and composing  requisites,  to the extent  that a sect of them  
described  themselves  the men of (Divine)  equity and Oneness,  and the 
theologians  were  given  the name  of learned  men of Allah's  Oneness,  even though  
nothing  of the items of this art was known  during  the first age (of the holy


Page 68:
________________________________ The quarter  of the acts of worship
panions),  who, moreover,  used to be hard in condemning  anyone  whenever  
he intended  to open  the gate of argumentation  and debate  (pertaining  to anything  
in the matters  of religion).
As to the evident  proofs  implied  in the Qur'an,  which the minds would  
immediately  accept at the first hearing,  they were well-known  to all. The 
knowledge  of the Qur'an  constituted  the whole  knowledge.  The Allah's  Oneness,  
in their sight, was something  different,  which most theologians  did not 
understand;  and even if they were able to understand  it, they would not be 
described  as scholastic  theologians.  It is to see that all things come Allah  
Almighty  in such a way as to divert  him from turning  to any intermediary  causes.  
Thus,  he sees that no good nor evil comes  but from Him Almighty.  Of a surety,  
this is a supreme  rank, and putting  one's trust (in Allah Almighty)  is one of its 
fruits,  as it shall be explained  later in the book  of putting  one's trust (in Allah).  
From  amongst  its fruits  also, a mention  might  be made  of refraining  from  making  
complaints  against  the people,  refraining  from becoming  angry  with them, the 
satisfaction  and admittance  of Allah's  Decree.
One of its resulting  fruits  was the statement  of Abu Bakr  As-Siddiq  "Allah  be 
pleased  with him", when he grew fatally ill, and they asked him to bring a 
physician  to treat him, thereupon  he said: "It is the physician  (i.e. Allah  Almighty)  
Who  has made  me ill." A mention  might  also be made  of his statement  in another  
narration  when  he was asked  about  what the physician  had told him, thereupon  
he said: "The  Physician  (Allah)  said to me: "I'm the Doer  (without  let) of all that I 
intend.""  However,  the supporting  proofs for that will be mentioned  in the 
books  of putting  one's  trust (in Allah)  and the Allah's  Oneness.
The theology  is like a precious  fruit which  has two successive  husks;  and of 
course,  the outer  one is farther  from  the bith than the inner  one. But the people  
restricted  the name only to the husk, and its protecting  the bith, and thus  
neglected  the bith entirely.  The outer  husk  is to bear testimony  with your tongue  
that "There  is no god(to  be worshipped)  but Allah",  and this is called  the contra-  
trinity  monotheism,  i.e. the trinity  declared  by the Christians.  But this might  be 
uttered  also by a hypocrite,  whose  secrecy  contradicts  his public.  The other  husk  
indicates  that there should  be no opposition  in one's  heart  to the concept  of this 
statement.  On the contrary,  one should  have faith and trust in it from the 
outward  of his heart; and this is the monotheism  observed  by the public.  
However,  the theologians  are the guardians  of this husk, to protect  it from the 
mystification  of the innovators  of heresies.  The third stands  for the bith, that is, 
one should  see that all things  come  from Allah,  in such a way as to divert  him 
from turning  to any intermediary  causes,  to worship  Him  uniquely,  and join none  
with Him  in worship.
But following  one's  own  vain desires  does not belong  to this monotheism,  for 
one who follows  his own vain desire has indeed taken his desire as his 
worshipped  Allah,  as shown  from  Allah's  statement:  "Then  do you see such  a one 
as takes  as his Allah  his own  vain desire?"  (Al-Jathiyah  23)66
com


Page 69:
Book  One:  Knowledge 67
4 SjJ o* 1
(It is narrated  by At-Tabarani  on the authority  of Abu Umamah  that) the 
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "The most hateful  Allah to be 
worshipped  on earth,  in the Sight  of Allah  Almighty,  is one's  own  vain desire."
In reality,  on consideration,  one knows  that he who worships  an idol does not, 
in fact, worship  the idol so much  as he worships  his own vain desire,  for he is 
inclined  to the tenets  of his fathers,  thereupon  he lags behind  his inclination.  The soul's  
inclination  to what  is familiar  is described  as one's  vein desire.
It is not a part of this monotheism  to grow angry with or have feeling  of 
resentment  towards  the creatures,  for how could  one who sees (and faithfully  is 
satisfied  with the fact) that all things  come  from  Allah  Almighty  have this feeling  
of resentment  towards  anyone  else?
Theology  had this high rank, and it is the rank of the truly faithful  believers.  
See to what  extent  it has been shifted,  and with which  husk the people  have  been  
satisfied,  and how they have sought  refuge  with mutual  praise  and boasting  of 
those things  whose  names  have a praiseworthy  reputation,  while being utterly  
bankrupt  in the meaning  and signification  for which  these names  stand,  and for 
which  they are praiseworthy.  Their  bankruptcy  is similar  to that of a man who  
gets up early  in the morning,  turns  his face towards  the Qiblah  and says: "For  me, 
I have set my face, firmly  and truly, towards  Him Who created  the heavens  and 
the earth,  and never  shall I give partners  to Allah."  (Al-An'am  79)
4 dp)
This is the first lie therewith  he commits  against  his Lord everyday,  unless  he 
should  turn to Allah  Almighty  with the depth  of his heart.  But if he means  only  
the apparent  meaning  of the word face, then, he turns his face only towards  the 
Ka'bah,  away from the other directions.  By no means  could the Ka'bah  be the 
direction  of Him Who  has created  both  the heavens  and the earth,  in order  to say 
that the one who turns his face towards  it has indeed  turned  his face towards  
That  Creator  "High  He be above  any limitation  of directions  or climes".
On the other  hand,  if he means  by it his heart,  as it should  be which  acts as 
the instrument  of worship,  how could  his words  be true since his heart  is bent  
upon  his worldly  desires  and needs,  and engaged  in devising  tricks  therewith  to 
collect  wealth  and authority  and to guarantee  worldly  means in abundance,  
towards  which  he is directing  the attention  of all his being?  When  then did he 
turn his face to the Creator  of the heavens  and the earth? The following  
statement  sums up the whole  matter  of monotheism:  the monotheist  is he who  
nothing  but Allah  the One and Only,  and turns his face only to Him. This  
complies  with the statement  of Allah when He says: “Say: "Allah (sent it 
down)":  then leave them to plunge  in vain discourse  and trifling."  (Al-An'amsees
91)
What is intended  here is not verbal  profession,  since the tongue  is like an 
interpreter  who tells the truth at one time and lies at another.  What Allah


Page 70:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
Almighty  regards  is (not the interpreter  (i.e. the tongue))  but that for which  the 
tongue  is the interpreter,  i.e. the heart which  is the source  of religion  and the 
place  wherefrom  it springs.
The fourth  term stands  for Dhikr  and Tadhkir  (celebration  of Allah and 
giving admonition).  In this respect,  Allah Almighty  says: " But give  
admonition  (by teaching  your Message):  for admonition  benefits  the 
Believers."  (Adh-Dhariyat  55)68
i b&sZX  oji >
There  are a lot of traditions  in which  the assemblies  of celebration  are praised.  
(It is narrated  by Tirmidhi  on the authority  of Anas  that) the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "When  you come upon the 
gardens  of Paradise,  you should  stop and enjoy  yourselves."  They asked:  "What  
the Gardens  of Paradise?"  he said: "They  are the assemblies  of celebration  (of 
Allah's  Praises)."
(It is narrated  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that) the Messenger  of Allah  
"Peace  be upon  him" said: “Verily,  Allah  Almighty  has roving  angels,  other  than  
those  who undertake  the guardianship  of men,  who roam the earth looking  for 
assemblies  of celebration  (of Allah's Praises).  On seeing an assembly  of 
celebration,  they beckon  to one another  saying: ‘Come unto your desired  
objective! ’ Then the rover angels gather around  these assemblies  and hear:  
'Behold!  Celebrate  (the Praises  of) Allah,  and take admonition!"'
This has been changed  to such practice  as you see now the most part of 
preachers  keep on in the form of story telling, recital of poems,  euphoric  
utterances  and heresies.
As for story telling,  it is an innovation  (of something  which  has no reference  
in the Islamic  tradition)  and it was forbidden  by the pious ancestors  to sit in a 
gathering  of a storyteller,  on the claim that this was not customary  during  the 
lifetime  of the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" (according  to the 
narration  of Ibn Majah),  nor was it during  the lifetime  of Abu Bakr, nor Umar  
until the affliction  broke  up, and the storytellers  appeared  in its accompaniment.  
It is narrated  that once  Ibn Umar  came  out of the mosque  and said: "Nothing  has 
led me to come  out of the mosque  other  than the storyteller,  and but for him, I 
would  have  not come  out."
It is narrated  that Damrah  said to Sufyan  Ath-Thawri:  "Should  we face the 
storyteller?"  he said: "Turn  your backs to those of innovations  (which  have no 
reference  in Allah's  Book  or the Prophetic  sunnah)."  Ibn Awn said: I visited  Ibn 
Sirin who asked me: "What  is the fresh news today?"  he said: "The governor  
forbade  the storyteller  to tell stories."  On that Ibn Sirin said: "He has been  guided  
by Allah  to the right  way."
Once,  Al-A'mash  entered  the mosque  of Basrah,  and found  a storyteller  sitting  
and he was involved  in telling  his narrations,  saying:  It is related  to us by Al- 
A'mash...",  thereupon  he sat in the middle  of the ring-shaped  gathering  and went  
on depilating  the hair of his armpit.  The storyteller  said to him: "O grand  sheikh!are


Page 71:
Book  One:  Knowledge
Are you not ashamed  of doing  that?"  he said: "Why?  I'm doing  something  which  
belongs  to the sunnah,  whereas  you are telling  a lie. I'm Al-A'mash,  and I've 
never  related  to you anything."
According  to Ahmad,  those who tell lies most are the storyteller  and the 
beggar."  It is further  narrated  that Ali "Allah  be pleased  with him" drove  out a 
storyteller  from the mosque  of Basrah,  and when he heard the speech  of Al- 
Hassan  Al-Basri,  he dismissed  him not, since  he was talking  about  the knowledge  
of the way to the hereafter,  reminding  the people  of death,  drawing  the attentions  
to the defects  of souls, the shortcomings  of deeds, the whispered  thoughts  
therewith  Satan  tempts  man,  and the ways of taking  care of that, giving  reminder  
of Allah's Favours  and Blessings,  the servant's  indulgence  in his gratitude,  
showing  the inferiority,  defects,  impending  end, and deceitfulness  of this world,  
and the dangers  and the terrors  of the hereafter.
This is the kind of giving  admonition  held praiseworthy  by law, and it is 
narrated  that it should  be encouraged  according  to the tradition  of Abu Dharr  
"Allah  be pleased  with him" according  to which  (the Prophet)  said: "To attend  a 
gathering  of celebration  and giving  admonition  is much  better  than to pray one 
thousand  rak'ahs,  and to attend  a gathering  of knowledge  is much  better  than to 
visit one thousand  ill persons  (to enquire  about  their health),  and to attend  an 
assembly  of knowledge  is much better than to follow  one thousand  funeral  
processions."  It was said: "O Messenger  of Allah!  And even much  better  than to 
recite  the Qur'an?"  on that he said: "Should  the recitation  of Qur'an  be of benefit  
without  knowledge?"  Ata' said: "A single session  of knowledge  prevails  over  
seventy  gatherings  of entertainment."
But, it is sorry  to say that those  of the deceptive  flowery  discourse  have taken  
these  traditions  as good  reason  for themselves  and have adapted  the name  giving  
admonition  (Tadhkir)  to their fables.  In this way, they have forgotten  the right  
path of praiseworthy  celebration  (Dhikr)  and rather  have  been  engaged  in relating  
tales which  are vulnerable  to variations,  additions  and omissions,  and which  
deviate  from and go beyond  the stories  implied  in the Qur ’an. Some tales are 
beneficial  to hear while  others  are harmful  in spite of their being  true. Whoever  
would  betake  himself  to this practice  would  not be able to distinguish  truth from  
lies and what is good from what is harmful.  From this point of view, it was 
forbidden.
For this reason  Ahmad  Ibn Hanbal  "Allah  be pleased  with him" said: “Much  
is the need of people  for a truthful  storyteller! ” If the story  is one of the stories  of 
the prophets  "Peace  be upon  them",  pertaining  to the affairs  of their  religion,  and 
the storyteller  is truthful  and reliable  in his narration,  I see no harm in it. But 
people  should  safeguard  themselves  against  lies and against  those stories  which  
point to trivial faults and compromises  which  the public fail to understand  or 
realize that they are nothing  but rare and slight faults being followed  by 
atonements  and rectified  by good  deeds  supposed  to cover  them  up. A layman  is 
apt to take refuge  to such reasoning  In order  to justify  his compromises  and find 
for himself  an excuse,  protesting  that such and such has been narrated  on the69


Page 72:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
authority  of such and such of masters  or prominent  men, adding  that 'as long as 
all of us are vulnerable  to committing  sins, it is no wonder  if I disobey  Allah  (and  
why not) since  a greater  person  than me has done  the same.'  This also causes  him 
to be more  daring  to disobey  Allah.
On the contrary,  if one should  safeguard  himself  against  these two dangers,  
there would  be no harm in it, for it would  return  to the praiseworthy  stories  
implied  in the Qur ’an and to the authentic  stories  of tradition.
There  are from amongst  the people,  those  who take the liberty  of fabricating  
stories  which  exhort  men to do what  leads them to be more  obedient  (to Allah  
Almighty),  with the claim  that they intend  thereby  nothing  but to call men to the 
truth.  But even, this is one of Satan's  temptations,  and it is telling  the truth that 
therewith  fabrication  could  be avoided.  Moreover,  there  is in what  Allah  and His 
Apostle  said enough  to dispense  with fabrication  in preaching.  How (should  it 
not be so) since the Prophet  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" disliked  
the pretentiousness  or rhymed  prose  which  he regarded  as pedantic.  It is narrated  
that Sa'd Ibn Abu Waqqas  said to Umar,  his son, who came to seek something  
from him, on hearing  him uttering  rhymed  speech:  "It is that (rhymed  speech)  
that causes  me to hate you. I will never  fulfill  your  need  until you give up that."
It is narrated  by that the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said to 
Abdullah  Ibn Rawahah  about  a three-statement  rhyme  he composed:  "I beware  
you of composing  rhymed  speech  O Ibn Rawahah!"  it seems  as if what  is beyond  
two rhymed  statements  should  belong  to the banned  and pedantic  rhyme.  For 
this reason,  (according  to the narration  of Muslim  on the authority  of Al- 
Mughirah)  when the man said about  the blood-money  of the fetus: "Should  we 
give the blood-money  for him who has got no drink  nor food,  nor has cried nor 
wept (once he was bom so that it would  be known  that he was alive before  he 
died):  of a surety,  this is like a nonentity"  the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  
him" said: "(Do you say) rhymed  speech  like the rhymed  speech  of the desert  
Arabs?"
As to poetry,  it is blameworthy  to use it so much  in preachings,  depending  
upon Allah's  saying:  " And the Poets,  it is those straying  in Evil, who follow  
them;  See you not that they  wander  distractedly  in every  valley?  And that they say 
what  they practise  not? "(The  Poets  224:226)
He Almighty  further  says: " We have not instructed  the (Prophet)  in Poetry,  
nor is it meet for him: this is no less than a Message  and a Qur ’an making  things  
clear"  (Ya Sin 69)70
^ Cjv Ok-4 y* Oj ^3 ^3 ^
The kind of poetry  that is most  customary  to preachers  is that which  belongs  
to the description  of affection,  the pretty  of the object  of adoration  (more  often  
the woman),  the spirit of connection,  and the severe pain of departure,  in 
gatherings,  whose  members  are mostly  of the crude among  the common  folk


Page 73:
Book  One: Knowledge  
whose  insides  are saturated  with lust and their hearts  never  refrain  from turning  
to fair faces.  This kind of poetry  inspires  nothing  in their hearts  but that which  
their hearts  already  conceal,  and enkindles  therein  the flames  of lust. Henceforth  
they begin  to shriek  and make  a show  of their  love. Most  of this, if not all, results  
from a certain  kind of corruption.  For this reason,  nothing  of poetry  should  be 
used except  that which  implies  moral  instruction,  by way of quotation  or giving  
examples.  It is narrated  (by Al-Bukhari  on the authority  of Ubai Ibn Ka'b) that 
the Messenger  of Allah said: "From  amongst  the (verses  of) poetry,  there are 
ones that imply  wisdom."
But, if the assembly  contains  only such of the elite as are known  to have their  
hearts  absorbed  in the love of Allah  Almighty,  no harm  will be caused  to those  by 
such of poetry  as whose  outward  indicates  to the description  of the creatures,  
since the listener  perceives  all that which he hears in accordance  with what  
prevails  in his heart, as it will be explained  in more detail  later in the book of 
audition.
For this reason,  Al-Junaid  "might  Allah bestow  mercy  upon him" used to 
address  with his speech  an assembly  of only some over ten person  and if they  
were more,  he would  not speak;  and by no way did the members  of his assembly  
reach  the number  of twenty.  Once,  a group  of people  gathered  near the door of 
the house  of Ibn Salim  and it was said to him: "Deliver  your speech,  since your  
companions  came (to listen to you)." He said: "No, those are not my 
companions.  They are the companions  of the assembly.  It is only the elite who  
constitute  my real companions."
We mean by the ecstatic  utterances  two kinds of speech  innovated  by 
some  Sufists:
One comprises  the long and broad  claims  of adoration  and love with Allah  
Almighty,  and the connection  which  renders  outward  deeds insignificant  until  
some  have affirmed  oneness  with Allah,  the removal  of the veil, vision  of Him  
with the eye, and direct  communication  through  speech.  They  say that they were  
told such and such and that they said such and such, in imitation  of Al-Hussain  
Ibn Mansur  Al-Hallaj  who was crucified  for uttering  words  of this type, and 
quote  as an example  his saying:  “I AM THE  TRUTH. ” It is also narrated  that 
Abu Yazid  Al-Bastami  said: “Glory  be to me! Glory  be to me!” This is, in fact, a 
type of speech  which  is extremely  harmful  to the common  folk, so much  that 
many farmers  have gave up their farms and proclaimed  the same claims.  
Furthermore,  this speech  is attractive  to human  nature  for it relieves  it from  work  
and gives superiority  to it through  the attainment  of those stations  and the 
experience  of those  states,  henceforth,  the ignorant  do not fail to claim  these  things  for 
themselves  nor to swallow  up such  confused  and flowery  words.
No matter  rejected  their claims  might  be, they do not hesitate  to say that such  
rejection  has been  the outcome  of knowledge  and disputation,  the knowledge  is a 
veil and the disputation  is the deed of the soul, while their words are not 
understood  except  from within  through  disclosure  of the light of the Truth.  
These  and similar  words  have spread  like fire in the land and their harm to the 
common  folk has become  grievous.  To destroy  the person  who comes  out with71
!


Page 74:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
such  words  is, according  to the religion  of Allah,  better  than to spare  ten lives.
As to Abu Yazid  Al-Bastami,  such words  as have been  ascribed  to him cannot  
be true. Even if he were heard saying  them,  most probably  he must have been  
repeating  to himself  words  about  Allah;  and it is the same as if he was heard  
quoting  the words  of Allah:  “Verily,  I am Allah:  there  is no god but Me: therefore  
worship  Me.” These words should  not have been taken within any context  
different  from  that of quotation.
The other type of ecstatic  utterances  is of ambiguous  words,  with pleasing  
aspects  and awesome  phrases,  even though  they are pointless.  They may be of 
two kinds: The first and the more common  comprises  words which are not 
understandable  to their speaker  who utters  them  because  of the perplexity  in his 
own mind and the confusion  in his imagination  resulting  from his ignorance  of 
the exact  meaning  of words  which  he hears.  The other  implies  words  which  may  
be understandable  to their speaker  even though  he is unable  to convey  them to 
others  through  exact language  which can express  his thoughts  in view of his 
inexperience  in science  and his lack of instruction  in rhetoric,.  Such  words  are of 
no use other than to confuse  the heart, amaze the mind, and perplex  the 
understanding.  They  are also apt to convey  a meaning  other  than that for which  
they are intended  so that anyone  may find in them  a meaning  which  is different  in 
accordance  with  his own nature  and desire.
In this context,  it is narrated  (by Abu Na'irn  on the authority  of Ibn Abbas)  
that the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "No one of you talks to a 
people  with words they understand  not but that those would be a cause of 
putting  them to trial." It is further  narrated  (by Al-Bukhari  ending  the chain of 
transmission  up to Ali, and Ad-Dailami  tracing  it up to) the Messenger  of Allah  
"Peace  be upon him" that he said: "Communicate  the people  with what they  
recognize,  and leave  what  they reject:  do you like that they would  give lie to Allah  
and His Messenger?"
This applies  to such of words as are understandable  to their author,  even  
though  incomprehensible  to the minds  of the listeners:  what  then about  such of 
words  as are not understandable  to the speaker  himself,  putting  in mind  that it is 
forbidden  to talk with words  which  are understandable  to the author,  and are not 
so to the listener?  In this respect,  it is narrated  that Jesus "Peace  be upon  him"  
said: "Place  not the wisdom  with men who are not fitting  for it, lest you would  
commit  injustice  against  it, nor withhold  it from those  who are fitting  for it, lest 
you would  wrong  them. Be like the skillful  physician  who applies  his medicine  
just to the location  of the disease."  In other  words:  "He,  who places  wisdom  with  
those who are not fitting for it has indeed proved  ignorant,  and he, who  
withholds  it from  those  who are fitting  for it has indeed  committed  injustice.  Of 
a surety,  wisdom  has a right,  and it has men who are fitting  for it: so, give each  
his own right."
As for heresies,  it implies  something  unique  to it, besides  what has been  
mentioned  under  the ecstatic  utterances.  It is to shift the words  of law from  their  
concrete  aspects  to esoteric  things,  which  are of no benefit  to the minds,  such as72


Page 75:
Book  One: Knowledge
the Batinite  method  of interpretation  which is unlawful  and of great harm;  
because  when  words  are made to connote  other than their concrete  meanings,  
with no authority  of the Prophetic  traditions  nor necessity  required  by reason,  
there will be no faith in words  nor benefit  in the statements  of Allah and His 
Apostle.  Almost  there can be no trust in what  is understood  therefrom  since its 
esoteric  meaning  cannot  be subject  to certain  definition;  rather  it is vulnerable  to 
different  opinions,  and it is open to many  interpretations.  This too belongs  to 
those widespread  innovations  whose  harm is very grievous.  The innovators  of 
those heresies  have sought  nothing  but the extraordinary  because  the human  
nature  is inclined  to take pleasure  from  what  is unusual.
In this way, those  of Batinah  doctrine  were  able to destroy  all the principles  of 
law, when  they interpreted  it and perverted  its exoteric  meaning  to comply  with  
their concept,  as we related about them in our book Mustazhar  which is 
composed  in reply to the tenets of Batinah.  An example  of the way of 
interpretation  adopted  by those of heresies  could  be found  in that given  by one 
of them  in comment  on Allah's  statement:  "Go you to Pharaoh,  for he has indeed  
transgressed  all bounds."  (Ta Ha 24)73
i ® oy-'j  JJ »
He said: "This refers to his heart,  i.e. the heart  which  transgresses  all bounds  
over the man."
The same is given  to Allah's  statement  to Moses:  "And put down  your rod!"  
(Al-Qasas  31)
I.e. that it refers  to all things  upon  which  one could  depend  or rely, other  than  
Allah  Almighty,  and which  he should  put down.  A mention  might  also be made  
of the statement  of the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him": "You should  
have your Suhur  (night meal which  a fasting  person  has a short while before  
dawn),  since there is blessing  in Suhur."  They said that he intended  thereby  the 
matter  of asking  for Allah's  Forgiveness  at the last portion  of the night (just  
before  dawn).  There  are similar  interpretations,  therewith  they intend  to pervert  
the whole of the Qur'an  from its exoteric  significance,  as well as from its 
interpretation  transmitted  from Ibn Abbas  and the good learned  men endued  
with knowledge  in this field.
To be sure, some of those interpretations  are certainly  invalid,  such as the 
notion  of Pharaoh  as the heart;  and that's because  Pharaoh  is a concrete  person,  
and we are sure of his existence,  as well as of Moses's  call to him, from the 
narrations  that have come down to us, the same as Abu Jahl (Father  of 
Ignorance)  and Abu Lahab  (Father  of Flames),  and others  who belong  to the 
infidels,  and by no means  do he belong  to devils  or angels,  or to anything  which  
could not be determined  by sense, so that the words should  be interpreted  
differently  (far from  their real meanings).  The same  is true of construing  Suhur  as 
asking  for Allah's  Forgiveness  at the last portion  of the night,  for the Messenger


Page 76:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" used to have his night  meal  
and say to his companions  (by way of exhortation):  "Have  your night  meals,  or 
come  to have the blessed  early  meal!"  of a surety,  the invalidity  of these  ways (of 
interpretation)  is evident,  either  through  the transmitted  tradition,  or by sense,  
the same as those  which  are beyond  sense.  All of that is unlawful,  and leads the 
people  to go astray  and become  victims  of corruption  in their  religion.
Furthermore,  nothing  of that was transmitted  from the holy companions,  nor 
from their followers,  nor from Al-Hassan  Al-Basri,  even though he was 
extremely  involved  in calling the people (to the religion  of Allah) and 
admonishing  them. Thus, no connotation  was given to the statement  of the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him": "He, who  
interprets  (the Qur'an)  just depending  upon  his own opinion,  let him occupy  his 
seat in the fire of Hell" other  than this meaning,  i.e. that one's purpose  is to state  
a certain  matter  and in order to confirm  his opinion,  he quotes  some Qur'anic  
ti xts, which  he gives connotations  in conformity  with his opinion,  even though  
with no supporting  evidence  from  the tradition  or language.
Nevertheless,  it should  not be understood  that the Holy  Qur'an  should  not be 
open to interpretation  with the help of intelligence  and reason:  there are 
narrations  from the Holy Companions  and commentators  that they given as 
much  as five, six or even seven  interpretations  of one Holy  Verse,  and we know  
that not all were heard  from the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon him", for some of them might be contradictory,  and far from  
reconciliation;  but they all were construed  with the help of good reasoning  and 
deep thinking.  For this reason,  it is narrated  that the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  
be upon  him" said to Ibn Abbas  (by way of invoking  good  upon  him): "O Allah!  
Give him the power of understanding  of religion  and instruct  him in the 
interpretation  (of the Qur'an)."
However,  such of the innovators  of heresies  as takes  the liberty  of giving  these  
interpretations,  knowing  that they are not literally  meant  by the words,  with the 
allegation  that his intention  is to call the people  to (the Presence  of) the Creator  is 
similar  to him, who takes the liberty  of fabricating  lies and attributing  them  to the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him",  to confirm  what  
seems  to be true in itself,  even though  there has no reference  in the law, just as 
the one who brings  about  a Prophetic  tradition  for any case he thinks  to be true.  
This is, by all means,  a clear transgression,  mischief,  whose  doer incurs upon  
himself  the threat  understood  from the statement  of the Messenger  of Allah  
"Peace  be upon him" (on the authority  of Abu Hurairah,  Ali and Anas):  "He,  
who attributes  lies to me, let him occupy  his seat in the fire (of Hell)."  Perverting  
the concepts  of those  words  is of greater  and more  grievous  evil, since it makes  
them  unreliable,  and not beneficial  in understanding  the text of the Holy  Qur'an.
Now you have come to know how Satan diverted  the people from the 
praiseworthy  sciences  to the blameworthy  ones, as a result of the confusion  
caused  by the teachers  of falsehood  with their changing  the names  of sciences.  If 
you follow  those  only depending  upon the prevalence  of the signification  of the74
f


Page 77:
Book  One: Knowledge  
name, without  turning  to that which it signified  during  the first age (of the 
companions),  you will be then like him, who seeks honour  through  wisdom,  by 
following  the so-called  a wise man, for the name  of wisdom  has come  those  days  
to be ascribed  to the physician,  the poet,  and the astrologer,  in view  of the lack of 
care for the change  of the names  of sciences.
The fifth term stands  for wisdom.  The term wise now has come to be 
ascribed  to the physician,  the poet, the astrologer,  and even the one who  
reads fortunes  for the peasants  who squat on street corners.  It is wisdom  
which Allah Almighty  appreciates  when He says: "He grants wisdom  to 
whom  He pleases;  and he to whom  wisdom  is granted  receives  indeed  a 
benefit overflowing;  but none will grasp the Message  but men of 
understanding."  (Al-Baqarah  269)
1^-^=*  !%>■ (JJ 1 ^ \ Uo ^ ^
i ©i%_^=-g  'C.'i
It is narrated  that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  Peace  be upon him"  
said: "A word of wisdom  man learns  is much  better  than all of this world  
and what  it contains."
Consider  the signification  of wisdom  in the past, and how it has been altered,  
and make a comparison  thereby  with the other  terms,  and avoid  being  deceived  
by the confusions  caused  by the bad learned  men, whose  evil against  religion  is 
much more grievous  than that of devils,  for it is by means  of them that Satan  
gradually  removes  the faith from  the hearts  of people.
For this reason,  when  the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him"  was asked  
about  the worst  of people,  he gave no answer  and rather  said: "O Allah!  I ask for 
Your Forgiveness!;";  and when  he was asked  once again he said: "They  are the 
bad learned  men."
You now have come  to know  the difference  between  the praiseworthy  and the 
blameworthy  science,  and the source  of confusion  pertaining  to them;  and it is up 
to you to choose  for yourself,  and consider  either  to copy the guidance  of the 
ancestors,  or hang down  with the rope of conceit,  and imitate  the modernists.  
That's  for all sciences  which  the ancestors  adopted  vanished,  and the most  part of 
those  in which  the modernists  were  involved  has been  newly  innovated  (and have  
no reference  in the Qur'an  and the sunnah);  and this confirms  the truth of the 
statement  of the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" (according  to the 
narration  of Muslim  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah):  "Islam  has begun  as a 
strange  religion,  and it will return  to become  strange  as it has begun:  blessed  be 
the strangers!"  it was said: "Who  are those strangers?"  he said: "They  are those  
who amend  such of (acts of) my sunnah  as the people  would  corrupt,  and give  
life to such (acts of) my sunnah  as the people  would  cause  to die" or, according  
to another  narration  "They  are those who constantly  stick to that which  you 
adopt  those  days."  He said in another  narration  (by Ahmad  on the authority  of 
Abdullah  Ibn Amr): "The strangers  are a very small group of good righteous  
people,  who live among  a multitude  of (evil) people,  Whose  haters  among  the 
people  are greater  in number  than their  lovers."75


Page 78:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
Those sciences  have become  strange  to the extent that the people  have  
aversion  towards  him who is engaged  in them.  For this reason,  Ath-Thawri  said:  
"If you see a learned  man having  more friends,  you should  know  that he makes  
confusions,  for if he says the truth,  they  will dislike  him."
The Commendable  Amount  Of Praiseworthy  Sciences
It should  be known  that sciences,  in this consideration,  are of three  parts:  one 
which  is blameworthy,  in whole  or part, one 
part; and the more one acquires  of it the better he will be, and the third is 
praiseworthy  as much  as one learns  of it what is sufficient,  and what is beyond  
sufficiency  is blameworthy,  and it is undesirable  to go thoroughly  into its deep  
and minute  details.  It is best exemplified  by the states  of the human  body:  both  
health  and beauty  are praiseworthy,  whether  in litde or much;  both ugliness  and 
bad manners  are blameworthy  whether  in litde or much;  and there are other  
things,  in which  observing  moderadon  is praiseworthy,  such as spending  money,  
for indeed,  extravagance  is not praiseworthy,  even though  it belongs  to spending,  
and courage,  in which  recklessness  is not praiseworthy  even though  it belongs  to 
bravery;  and the same  is true of knowledge.
The blameworthy  part of it, whether  in litde or much,  is that which  is of no 
use, in the religion  or the world,  since its resulting  harm prevails  its benefit,  like 
the science  of magic  and talismans,  and astrology:  there  is no benefit  in all of that,  
and to spend  one's  life, which  is the most  valuable  property  he has, in learning  it 
is to waste what is valuable,  and to be sure, wasting  what is valuable  is 
blameworthy.  The harm of some of those sciences  are greater  than the good  
thought  to do in life. But even,  whatever  this good  might  be, in no way could  be 
compared  with the resulting  harm.
Such  of sciences  as whose  learning  is praiseworthy,  to the utmost  perfecdon  is 
the knowledge  of Allah Almighty,  His Attributes  and Acts, His ordinance  of 
creation,  and His Wisdom  of giving  superiority  to the hereafter  over this world.  
This knowledge  is required  for itself, as well as to attain the felicity  of the 
hereafter  through  it. To exert oneself  even to the utmost  of his effort  runs short  
of what  is required  because  it is like the sea whose  depth  cannot  be sounded  and 
whose  shores  and edges could be approached  only as much as has been made  
easy for them;  and no one has navigated  its ends except  the prophets,  the saints,  
and those  who are well-established  in the knowledge  of Allah,  each according  to 
his rank and power  and Allah's  preordainment  for him. This is the well-guarded  
knowledge  which  is recorded  in books but whose  acquisition  may be at first 
achieved  by learning  and considering  the states  of the learned  man in the science  
of the (way to the) hereafter  whose  characteristics  we shall discuss  later. This is 
done  at first, and then It increases  through  self-mortification,  discipline,  purifying  
the heart  and freeing  it from the affairs  of this world,  and emulating  the prophets  
and the saints so that it may be revealed  to every seeker (of knowledge)  in 
accordance  with his labour,  even though  the exertion  of effort  to one's best in it 
is indispensable  for self-mortification  is the sole key to guidance,  other than76
which  is praiseworthy,  in whole  or
!


Page 79:
Book  One: Knowledge  - 
which  there  is no key to it.
As for sciences,  who are praiseworthy  to a certain  extent,  they are those  
mentioned  in the chapter  of the collective  duties:  each of those  sciences  has three  
stages  (of learning):  the first is the exclusive  learning,  which  is the least amount,  
the second  is the moderate  learning,  which  is the intermediate,  and the third is 
the thorough  learning  and it is beyond  that moderation  which  goes on during  
one's  entire  lifetime.  Be then one of two men: either  to be occupied  by educating  
yourself,  or devoted  to educating  the others,  after finishing  from educating  
yourself,  and beware  of devoting  yourself  to reforming  the others before  
reforming  yourself.  If you choose  to be occupied  by educating  yourself,  do not be 
concerned  but with learning  such of sciences  as is incumbent  upon you, in 
accordance  with your required  need, pertaining  to the outward  deeds,  such as 
learning  the principles  of prayer,  purification  and fasting.
Nevertheless,  the most important  of sciences,  which  almost  all the people  
have neglected  is the knowledge  of the praiseworthy  and blameworthy  attributes  
of the heart,  since no human  being  is free from such blameworthy  attributes  as 
miserliness,  envy,  arrogance,  haughtiness,  showing  off, and the like of them;  and 
all of those  are among  the destructives,  and refraining  from them is obligatory.  
Performing  those  outward  deeds  is just like the external  application  of liniment  to 
the body when it is afflicted  with scabies  and boils in spite of indulgence  in 
removing  the pus by surgery  or purge.  False  scholars  recommend  outward  deeds  
just as fake physicians  prescribe  external  ointments  for potent  internal  diseases.  
The learned  men of the hereafter  recommend  nothing  but the purification  of the 
inward  and the removal  of the sources  of evil by cutting  off their nursery-beds  
and uprooting  them  from the heart.  It is only because  of the easy character  of the 
deeds  of the senses  and the difficulty  of the deeds  of the heart  that most people  
have neglected  the purification  of their hearts and devoted  themselves  to the 
outward  deeds,  just as the one who takes refuge  to the external  application  of 
ointments  when he finds it unpleasant  to drink a bitter medicine,  and go on 
application  of ointment,  persistently  increases  the ingredients,  therewith  his 
ailments  multiply.
If you are longing  for the hereafter,  seeking  salvation  and flight  from eternal  
damnation,  pursue  the science  of inward  diseases  and their remedies,  as we have  
described  it in the Quarter  on the Destructives  of Life, which  will lead you to the 
praiseworthy  stations  mentioned  in the Quarter  on the saviors  of Life; and that's  
because  once the heart  is cleansed  from  what  is blameworthy,  it is filled  with that 
which  is praiseworthy  just as the soil where  all kinds  of plants  and flowers  would  
grow  as soon as the grass is weeded  out, and unless  it is removed  no plants  nor 
flowers  would  grow.
On the other  hand,  do not pursue  those  sciences  whose  learning  is a collective  
duty particularly  when they have already  been undertaken  by others.  He who  
would  spend  himself  in pursuing  what would  reform  others  (before  he reforms  
himself)  is a weak-minded:  how foolish  is the man underneath  whose  clothes  
snakes  and scorpions  have crept  and have been about  to kill him, even though  he77


Page 80:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
is engaged  in looking  for a whisk  therewith  to drive flies away from the other  
people,  a task which  will neither  spare nor save him from what he is going  to 
suffer  from  the attacks  of those  snakes  and scorpions.
But, if you have finished  from purifying  yourself  and have been able to 
abstain  from outward  and inward  sin in such a way that purity  of the heart  
and abstinence  from  sin have become  to you a religion  and a habitual  practice,  
and how far it is,, then you may pursue  those sciences  whose  learning  is a 
collective  duty. You should  observe  gradual  progress  therein:  begin  with the 
Book of Allah, then the sunnah  of His Apostle,  then the science of 
interpretation  and the other sciences  of the Qur ’an such as that of the 
abrogating  and the abrogated,  the related  and the unrelated,  and the difference  
between  what  is basic or fundamental  (of established  meaning)and  what  is of 
ambiguous  meaning.
The same  should  be applicable  to the study  of the sunnah  after  which  you may  
proceed  to the study of applied  jurisprudence  which  is the elaboration  of the 
positive  law within jurisprudence.  You may proceed to the sources of 
jurisprudence  and to the other  sciences  as much  as is within  the limits  of the span  
of life and time allowance.  Do not spend  the whole  of your life in one of these  
sciences  seeking  the thoroughness  of embracing,  because  the branches  of 
knowledge  are various  and numerous  and life is short. Furthermore  these  
sciences  are only introductory  means  sought  not for themselves  but for the sake  
of something  else; and in everything  which  is sought  as a means  for attaining  
another,  the end should  not be forgotten  nor should  the sight  be restricted  from78
it.
Limit  yourself,  in the study  of vernacular  speech,  to that which  would  enable  
you to understand  and speak the Arab tongue,  and in the study of the strange  
words,  to those occurrences  of the Qur ’an and Hadith,  and avoid going  into 
them deeply.  As to syntax,  confine  your effort  to what is related  to the Qur ’an 
and the sunnah,  since every science  has three stages of learning:  the exclusive  
learning,  the moderate  learning,  and the thorough  learning.
We are going to describe  those three stages of learning,  in the Hadith,  
interpretation,  jurisprudence  and theology,  just as exemplary  standard  of 
measuring  the others.  The exclusive  learning  of interpretation  is twice  the size of 
the Qur'anic  text as the Wajiz (the Brief) composed  by Ali Al-Wahidi  An- 
Naisaburi;  and the moderate  learning  is three times the size of the Qur'anic  text,  
as the Wasit  (the Intermediate)  which  he composed  therein;  and what  is beyond  
that belongs  to the dispensable  thorough  learning,  which  might  go on during  
one's  entire  lifetime.
As to the exclusive  learning  of Hadith,  it is sufficient  to have mastery  of 
what  the two Sahihs  contain,  through  a version  that is well-revised  and edited  
by a man who is well-versed  in the science  of the texts of Hadith.  It is not 
necessary  for you to retain the names of the men (of the chains of 
transmission),  since you have been sufficed  this burden  by those who  
preceded  you, and you might depend  upon their books in this respect.


Page 81:
Book  One: Knowledge
Furthermore,  you are not required  to memorize  the texts of both Sahihs,  but 
it is sufficient  for you to retain  out of them  what  enables  you to get what  you 
are in need of when  it is raised.  The intermediate  learning  thereof  is to add to 
them  what is beyond  them in the authentic  Musnads.  The thorough  learning  
comprises  all that is beyond  that, to imply all the transmitted  traditions,  
including  the weak and the strong,  the authentic  and the defective,  and the 
knowledge  of the various  ways of transmission,  and the names,  states and 
attributes  of their different  men.
As for jurisprudence,  the exclusive  learning  is to grasp the contents  of Al- 
Mukhtasar  (the Concise)  composed  by Al-Muzani  "Might  Allah bestow  mercy  
upon  him",  which  we have rearranged  in the book  of Khulasat  Al-Mukhtasar  (the 
Elite of the Concise);  and the moderate  learning  is as long as three  times,  and this 
amount  is equal  to the material  implied  in the book  of Al-Wasit  Min Al-Madhhab  
(the Intermediate  in Jurisprudence);  and the thorough  learning  is equal  in amount  
to the material  implied  in Al-Basit  (the Simple),  and the likewise  lengthy  
compositions.
As far as theology  is concerned,  it is solely intended  to protect  the tenets  
transmitted  by the men of sunnah,  from amongst  the good righteous  ancestors,  
and no more;  and what is beyond  that is an attempt  to discover  the realities  of 
things  improperly.  The real objective  of learning  the sunnah  is to grasp  only the 
exclusive  degree  of acquisition,  through  a limited  creed,  which  is similar  to the 
material  we've brought  in the book of the Principles  of Beliefs  implied  in this 
book (of Revival);  and the moderate  learning  is as much  as one hundred  papers,  
which  is similar  to what is implied  in the book of Al-Iqtisad  Fi Al-I'tiqad  (the 
Moderate  in Belief),  and it is needed  for in order  that one should  be able to argue  
against  an innovator  of heresy,  in opposition  to his heretical  doctrine,  and 
undermine  it and remove  it from the heart  of the ordinary  man,  even though  it is 
of no use unless  it is done  with the public  folk before  they get extremely  zealous,  
and that's because  the speech  could  hardly  be of good use with such innovator  
(of heresies),  especially  when he has learnt  even to a limited  degree  the art of 
argumentation;  and if you even are able to silence  him in argument,  he will not 
abandon  his doctrine,  and will rather protest  with his failure,  affirming  that 
somebody  else might  meet  your  argument,  of which  he is incapable,  since  you put 
him to confusion  by the power  of your argumentation.  But if an ordinary  man is 
diverted  from the truth with an argument,  he might  be brought  back to it once  
again  with opposing  argument,  especially  when  his fanaticism  in those  errors  is 
still not far gone. But if their fanaticism  grows  deep-rooted,  there will be loss 
of hope  for bringing  them  back to the truth,  since fanaticism  is a primal  cause  
of affirming  the beliefs  in the minds  of men; and this is one of the defects  of 
the evil men of knowledge,  who exceed  the due bounds  in their fanaticism  for 
what they think  to be the truth,  and look,  with the eye of scorn,  down  upon  
the nonconformists.  This drives the nonconformists  to have ill feeling  
towards  them,  encourages  them to seek the support  of falsehood,  and makes  
them  more  determined  to adhere  to their position.  But if these  fanatics  would79


Page 82:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
approach  their opponents  privately  in a spirit of kindness,  sympathy,  and 
advice  rather  than attack  them publicly  in the spirit  of bigotry  and acrimony,  
they might  succeed  in their effort.  But as long as prestige  requires  a following  
and nothing  attracts  a following  better  than bigotry,  cursing  and slandering  
opponents,  they have adopted  fanaticism  as their rule of conduct  and their  
method  of approach,  and call it a defence  of religion  and a protection  for the 
Muslims,  even though  it leads  to nothing  but the destruction  of all people  and 
the well-establishment  of innovated  heresies  in their  minds.
As for these  controversies  that have broken  up in these recent  times  and on 
which  great  works  of compositions  and argumentations  have been written,  the 
like of which  have neither  been seen nor heard by the Fathers,  you should  
beware  of approaching  them,  and avoid them as you avoid deadly  poison  for 
they are like a strong  disease.  It was these controversies  which  have driven  all 
jurisprudents  to seek after rivalry  and boasting  which  will be discussed  later  
with more  detail  of their dangers  and evils. But it might  be said: "No doubt,  the 
people  are enemies  of that of which  they are ignorant."  Nevertheless,  do not 
believe  in that, for indeed,  You have found the one who is well-acquainted:  
accept  this advice  from  one who has wasted  his life in those  (controversies)  and 
went beyond  the ancestors  in composition,  investigation,  argumentation,  and 
exposition  until Allah  inspired  him with His righteousness  and disclosed  to him 
the flaws therein.  Henceforth,  he abandoned  controversies  and devoted  his 
attention  to himself.  Do not be deceived  by these  who say that giving  religious  
verdicts  is the pillar of law, even though  they have no knowledge  of its 
principles  except  through  the art of argumentation,  while the principles  of 
religion  are contained  in the books  of religion  and any additions  are nothing  but 
wranglings  which  neither  the ancestors  nor the Companions,  who had greater  
versatility  than any others  in the principles  of religious  verdicts,  had known.  
These  wranglings  are not only of no use for the science  of religion,  but also 
they cause  harm  and corruption  to one’s taste and judgement  in jurisprudence.
What is proved  true by the judgement  of him who is endued  with the 
authority  of giving religious  verdicts,  in case his judgement  and taste in 
jurisprudence
argumentation.  That is because  he who is absorbed,  by nature,  in syllogisms  of 
controversy  becomes  subject  to the requirements  of argumentation,  rather  than  
to the good taste of jurisprudence.  None  is engaged  in it barring  him, who seeks  
only after prestige  and majesty,  pretending  that he seeks after the science  of 
religion,  even though  his life might  be consumed,  without  exerting  the slightest  
effort  to acquire  the science  of religion.  So, you should  feel secure  of the devils  of 
jinns, for indeed,  the devils of men have relieved  those of jinns of trouble  of 
tempting  and misleading  the people.  In brief, it is satisfactory  to those of good  
and sound minds that you should  regard  yourself  as if you are alone in the 
universe,  in the Presence  of Allah  Almighty,  expecting  for death,  demonstration  
(after  resurrection),  reckoning,  the Garden  and the fire (of Hell),  hoping  only for 
what  concerns  you from that which  is before  you, and wipe off yourself  anything80
right, could hardly comply with the conditions  of are


Page 83:
Book  One: Knowledge  ---------------- —------------------
else (which  concerns  you not): and peace  be upon  you.
It is narrated  that one of the sheikhs  saw in his dream  a learned  man, whom  
he asked: "What  about those sciences,  in which  you used to be involved  in 
argumentation  and debate?"  he stretched  his hand and blew  in it and said: "All of 
them have vanished  like the dust scattered  about  in the air, and I have not get 
benefit  but from two rak'ahs  I’ve performed  (with sincere  intention)  in the 
middle  of the night."  According  to a certain  narration  (by At-Tirmidhi  on the 
authority  of Abu Umamah),  "No people  have been misled  and given to error  
after  their  guidance  but that they  were  perched  in disputation."  Then  he recited:  " 
This they set forth to you, only by way of disputation:  yea, they are a contentious  
people."  (Az-Zukhruf  58)81
Csjio Uj
According  to another  narration,  in comment  on Allah's  statement:  "But  those  in 
whose  hearts  is perversity  follow  the part thereof  that is allegorical"  (A1 Imran  7)
4. (fS 4 ^ ^
"Those  are the men of disputation,  whom  Allah Almighty  means by His 
statement:  "So, beware  of them!"  it is said by one from amongst  the good  
ancestors:  "Towards  the end of this time, there  will appear  the one in whose  face 
the gate of deeds  will be closed,  and to whom  the gate of disputation  will be 
opened."  According  to another  tradition,  "You  are now in a time,  in which  you've  
been inspired  to do deeds,  and a people  will come (after you), who will be 
inspired  (to be involved  in) disputation  instead."  According  to the famous  
narration  (on the authority  of A'ishah):  "The  one who is the most  hateful  among  
the people  in the Sight of Allah  Almighty  is the contentious  quarrelsome."  It is 
further  narrated  that "No people  have been  given  to logic and argumentation  but 
that their deeds  will be suffered  to be lost."  And Allah  Almighty  knows  best.
CHAPTER  FOUR:
ON THE CAUSE  OF PEOPLE  S INTEREST  IN POLEMICS;  THE DEFECTS  
OF ARGUMENTATION  AND DISPUTATION;  AND  THE CONDITIONS  OF 
RENDERING  THEM  PERMISSIBLE
It should  be known  that after the death  of the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be 
upon him",  the office  of caliphate  was taken  by the well-directed,  rightly-guided  
successors,  who were good imams  endued  with knowledge  of Allah Almighty,  
and versatility  in His Judgements  and Commandments.  Furthermore,  they were  
capable  of giving  religious  verdicts  in their judgements,  and they hardly  sought  
the help of jurisprudents  except in rare cases, in connection  with which  
consultation  was necessary.  So, the learned  men were entirely  devoted  to the 
knowledge  of the (way to the) hereafter,  and gave up the matter  of religious  
verdicts,  and anything  relating  to the people's  judgements  in this world,  and 
rather  wholeheartedly  and faithfully  turned  to Allah Almighty,  as transmitted  
from  their  biographies.


Page 84:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
When  the office  of caliphate  was moved  to a people,  who were not fitting  
for it, nor had they mastery  over the science  of religious  verdicts  and 
judgements,  they were forced  by necessity  to seek the help and company  of 
jurisprudents  in all their states,  in order  to ask them for religious  verdicts  and 
commandments  in the course  of their ruling.  But, from amongst  the learned  
men of the followers,  there remained  some,  whose  conduct  was a continuation  
of the first generation,  a commitment  to the pure religion,  and a persistence  on 
the way of the good early men of knowledge:  whenever  they were sought  after,  
they would  flee, and turn away,  which  led the caliphates  to be importunately  
persistent  on asking them to be in charge of the offices of judge and 
government.
The people  of that age saw how such learned  men were honourable,  and how  
the rulers  and chiefs  turned  to them,  even though  they betook  themselves  away  
from them. Henceforth,  they stretched  their necks up and looked  forward  to 
seeking  after knowledge,  in attempt  to become  honoured  and given prestige  by 
the rulers.  They  were involved  in the science  of religious  verdicts,  and offered  
their services  to the rulers,  and established  relations  with them, and asked for 
offices and gifts from them, with the result that some failed, and others  
succeeded;  and even the successful  one among  them was not far from the 
humility  of begging  and the servility  of indebtedness.
In this way, the jurisprudents  came to be job seekers  after they had been  
sought  for (by the rulers),  and they were  put to humiliation  by their turning  to the 
rulers  and governors  after they had been  honoured  by their  refraining  from  them.  
But an exception  was made for those,  whom  Allah  Almighty  gave guidance  and 
success,  from amongst  the learned  men of every time, endued  with the 
knowledge  of the religion  of Allah  Almighty.
Therefore,  it was the science  of religious  verdicts  to which  the people  turned  
most,  because  the need for it was felt by the different  offices  and governments.  
Then,  there appeared  many  chiefs  and governors  who were inclined  to listen to 
the articles  of people  pertaining  to the principles  of beliefs,  and their related  
proofs  and evidences.  In this way, their desire  for argumentation  and disputation  
in theology  became  well-known,  which led the people to be involved  in 
composing  so much  in theology,  in which  they set forth  the ways of syllogisms  of 
controversy,  and pointed  out the different  methods  of contradictions,  pretending  
that their real purpose  was to defend  Allah's  religion,  and protect  the sunnah  (of 
His Prophet),  and curb the innovators  (of heresies),  just as the jurisprudents  who  
preceded  them claimed  that they devoted  themselves  to the legal profession  and 
took upon themselves  the affairs  of the Muslims  just out of pity for Allah ’s 
creatures  and for the sake of giving  them  counsel  and advice.
Some time later, there appeared  many celebrities  and rulers,  who regarded  
improper  to discourse  in theology,  and open  the gate of argumentation  therein,  in 
view of the resulting  clear fanaticisms  and widespread  enmities,  which  led to 
bloodshed  and destruction  of countries.  They rather  were inclined  to the matter  
of argumentation  in jurisprudence,  in order to distinguish  the more significant82


Page 85:
Book  One:  Knowledge
points  of the doctrines  of both Ash-Shafi'i  and Abu Hanifah  in particular.  In this 
way, the people  left theology  and its related  science,  and pursued  the questions  of 
disagreement  between  both Shafi'i  and Abu Hanifah  in particular,  paying  little  
attention  to the points  of disagreement  between  Malik,  Sufyan  Ath-Thawri  and 
Ahmad  Ibn Hanbal,  and the others,  pretending  that their purpose  was to figure  
out and make clear the niceties  of law, determine  the principles  of religion,  and 
set the basis for the foundations  of religious  verdicts  and decisions.  They  made  so 
many  compositions,  in which  they made  clear so much  abstruse  points,  and set 
forth the different  kinds  of syllogisms  of controversy,  and numbered  the various  
works  pertaining  to that. Nowadays,  they continue  their doing,  and we do not 
know  what Allah Almighty  will cause to happen  in the future.  This is the sole 
reason  which  led the people  to pursue  the controversies  and argumentations.  
And if the lords  of this world  are inclined  to favour  another  imam,  or to a certain  
science,  surely,  they would  follow  it, and they will not cease to pretend  that their  
occupation  was the science  of religion,  with a sole intention  to come  much  closer  
to (the Presence  of Allah  the) Cherisher  and Sustainer  of the worlds.
The Exposition  Of THE Confusion  In Comparing  Of THESE  
Argumentations  With  THE CONSULTATIONS  OF THE Holy  
COMPANIONS  AND  THE Advices  OF THE Forefathers,
It should  be known  that those  might  drag the people  to have trust in the idea 
that "our real purpose  from those argumentations  is to seek after the truth, in 
order that it should  become  clear, since truth in itself  is desired,  and any co­
operation  in the examination  of truth and the exchange  of views  therein  is both  
helpful  and influential."  This use of consultation  (almost  in all matters)  was 
customary  to the holy companions  "Allah be pleased  with them",  like their  
consultation  in the (inheritance  of) the grandfather,  the brothers,  their  
consultation  in the legal punishment  of the drunk,  the obligation  of an indemnity  
due upon the ruler in case he committed  a mistake,  as it is shown  from the 
narration  according  to which  a woman  committed  abortion  for her fear of Umar  
"Allah  be pleased  with him",  in addition  to several  cases of obligatory  shares  of 
inheritance,  and what  is narrated  by Shafi'i,  Ahmad,  Muhammad  Ibn Al-Hassan,  
Malik  and Abu Yusuf,  and the like of them from amongst  the learned  men of 
knowledge  "Allah's  Mercy  be upon  all of them".
However,  this suspicious  comparison  (between argumentation  and 
consultation)  might  be clear from what I'm going  to mention,  i.e. that the co­
operation  to seek after the truth is out of religion,  but it has eight distinctive  
conditions  and signs:
The first: since  it is one of the collective  duties,  the one who does not fulfill  
all obligatory  duties  (whose  learning  is binding  upon  every  Muslim)  should  not be 
engaged  in it; and he, who is engaged  in any of the collective  duties,  claiming  that 
he is searching  for the truth, although  fulfilling  an obligatory  duty is still due 
upon him is a liar. The example  of that is the one who leaves the obligatory  
prayer,  and turns to the trade of weaving  and tailoring,  pretending  that his83


Page 86:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
purpose  is to cover  the private  parts of him who prays  while  naked,  and has no 
garment.  However,  this might  happen,  and it is possible,  just as the occurrence  of 
the rare cases  which  are the subject  of the research  of controversies  is possible,  as 
pretended  by a jurisprudent.  Those  who are 
many  affairs,  which  unanimously  belong  to the obligatory  dudes  (whose  doing  is 
binding  upon  every  Muslim),  Similarly,  anyone  who has been expected  to return  a 
deposit  to its owner  at once, but, instead  of doing so, takes refuge  to prayer  
which  is the worthiest  of all obligations  in the Sight of Allah, disobeys  Him  
because  it is not enough  to be obedient  and one's deed constitutes  an act of 
service  unless  he observes  therein  the relevance  of time,  condition  and sequence.
The second:  one should  not be engaged  in argumentation  unless  he finds no 
other  collective  duty waiting  for him, of more significance,  for he who finds any 
collective  duty awaiting  him more significant  than argumentation,  and even  
though  he is engaged  in such (argumentation),  disobeys  Allah.  His example  is like 
the example  of him,  who sees a group  of thirsty  people  whom  the people  neglect,  
who are on the verge  of death  because  of severe  thirst,  and although  he is able to 
restore  them  to life by giving  them  water,  he is engaged  in learning  the profession  
of cupping,  pretending  that it is one of the collective  duties,  and if the country  is 
lacking  in it, its inhabitants  would  be ruined;  and even if he is told that there is a 
group  of cuppers  in the countries,  and they are sufficient  in such a way that there  
is no need for his service,  he will argue that this will not exclude  it from being  
one of the collective  duties.  The case of him who does so, and neglects  the event  
which  afflicts  this group  of thirsty  Muslims  is like the case of him who is engaged  
in argumentation,  although  there  are other  collective  duties,  of more  significance,  
which  none  takes  up in the country.  As for the science  of religious  verdicts,  it has 
been undertaken  by many, and there is no country,  in which there are no 
collective  duties,  which  have been subject  to the negligence  of the jurisprudents.  
The most important  of those is medicine:  we could hardly find a Muslim  
physician  whose  witness  pertaining  to law might  be reliable,  and none of the 
jurisprudents  desire  for taking  it up. The same is true of enjoining  what is right  
and forbidding  what  is evil: although  it is one of the collective  duties,  one who  
practices  argumentation  might  see in his gathering  of debate  silk in the form of 
garments  and carpets,  but even,  he keeps  silent,  and rather  is involved  in debate  
over a case whose  occurrence  is rare, and even if it occurs,  it will be undertaken  
by a group  of jurisprudents.  Nevertheless,  he pretends,  by doing  so, that his real 
intention  is just to come  much  closer  to Allah  Almighty  by performing  one of the 
collective  duties,  in this context,  it is narrated  (by Ibn Majah)  on the authority  of 
Anas that it was said: "O Messenger  of Allah! When should the matter  of 
enjoining  what  is right and forbidding  what  is evil be abandoned?"  he "Peace  be 
upon him" said: "When  adulation  will become  widespread  among  your good  
men, the lewdness  among  your evil men, the dominion  will move to the 
youngsters  among  you, and the jurisprudence  to the lowly  among  you."
The third:  when  one who practices  argumentation  does his best depending  
upon his knowledge  to be on the right gives legal opinions  and religious84
engaged  in jurisprudence  neglect  so


Page 87:
Book  One: Knowledge  
verdicts  depending  only upon  his own knowledge,  and not upon  the doctrines  
of such grand  pioneering  imams  as Shafi'i,  Abu Hanifah,  and the like of them;  
and when the truth appears  to him in accordance  with the doctrine  of, say, 
Abu Hanifah,  he leaves  his own opinion,  and what agrees  with it from the 
doctrine  of Shafi'i  and rather  gives his religious  verdicts  depending  upon  such  
of truth as has appeared  to him from the doctrine  of Abu Hanifah,  the 
as the holy companions  "Allah  be pleased  with them"  and the grand  imams  
used to do.
But as for him who is lacking  in the sufficient  knowledge  and the capacity  of 
giving  independent  religious  verdicts  as is the case with all contemporaries,  but 
transmits  his opinions  on the authority  of his imam,  it is not fitting  for him to 
reject  his doctrine  even though  he should  discover  its weakness.  Of what  benefit  
to him is debate  when his doctrine  is well-known  and his opinions  are apt to 
comply  with it? And whenever  a doubtful  point confronts  him he would  be 
compelled  to say that the founder  of his doctrine  might  have an answer  as he 
himself  has no capacity  to interpret  independendy  the foundations  of law. But 
perhaps,  if his discussions  are on points which are open to two different  
opinions,  It would  be more fitting  for him for then he might  give his verdict  in 
favour  of the one and against  the other  and become  thereby  more  inclined  to one 
and opposed  to the other.  Therefore,  argumentations  are not confined  to this 
kind of cases  which  are open  to two different  views  or opinions.  Most  frequently,  
there  is greater  inclination  to pursue  the cases in which  the points  of controversy  
have been fully discussed  and decided.
The fourth:  one should  not debate  but in a matter  which  occurs,  or at least is 
frequently  expected  to occur.  However,  the holy companions  "Allah  be pleased  
with them"  did not consult  each other  but in events,  which  occurred,  or would  
most frequently  occur,  like the obligations.  The debaters  are rarely concerned  
with criticizing  the questions,  in connection  with which  the legal opinions  and 
verdicts  arise widespread  tribulations:  on the contrary,  they often  pursue  the far- 
reaching  and impressive  questions,  which  give rise to more widespread  debates  
and argumentations,  whatever  the nature  of the case might  be, leaving  the case  
which  might  occur  at most,  claiming  that it is a reported  or even a rare case, not 
stunning.  How  amazing  it is to pursue  the truth  in a certain  case,  which  they leave  
only for it is reported,  and it is such nature  which  makes  it true, or leave  claiming  
that since it is stunning,  only a little discussion  should  be given to it. The main  
point,  as far as the truth is concerned,  is to reduce  debate  and reach  conclusions  
concisely  and not flatulendy.
The fifth:  the debate  in seclusion  is more  favourable  to him (the debater)  than  
in the gatherings  and at the sight and hearing  of the celebrities  and rulers.  Of a 
surety,  seclusion  is more  conducive  to understanding  and its atmosphere  is more  
suitable  to clear  thinking.  Public  meetings  induces  hypocrisy  and makes  one more  
eager  to defend  himself  whether  he is right  or wrong.  It is a well-known  fact that 
these public  meetings  and assemblies  are 
the sake of AJlah. One of them may be alone with his companion  for a long85
same
not sought  after by their devotees  for


Page 88:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
period  of time but will not even talk to him because  there is no audience  to 
applaud  his speech.  He may at times  propose  to make a discussion  but gets no 
response  for the same reason.  But as soon as someone  appears  or a group  
assembles,  he tries his utmost  to provoke  a controversy  and then take over the 
discussion.
The sixth:  that such (a debater)  should  seek after the truth  in the same  way as 
he is searching  for a lost thing, and it is the same to him, whether  the truth  
appears  at his hand, or at the hands of anyone  who helps him, regarding  his 
companion  as a helpful  friend  and not as an adversary,  and gives  thanks  to him in 
case he drives  him to the mistake,  and shows  the truth to him. His example  is like 
the one who follows  a certain  path in search  for his lost thing,  and his companion  
draws  his attention  to the fact that his lost thing is on another  way, which  he 
should  follow  in order  to find it: in this case,  he should  not criticize  him so much  
as he should  appreciate  his deed,  honour  him and rejoice  with him. As such  were  
the consultations  of the holy companions  "Allah  be pleased  with them",  to the 
extent that a woman  interrupted  Umar about a certain  matter  and drew his 
attention  to the truth therein  while  he was delivering  his speech  in the presence  
of the public,  which  led him to say: "A woman  has hit the mark, and a man  
(Umar)  has missed."  It is narrated  that a man asked  Ali "Allah  be pleased  with  
him" about  something,  and he said: "It is such and such."  The man said: "No, it 
is not so O Commander  of Believers!  It is such and such." On that Ali said:  
"You've  hit the mark while I've missed:  and above everyone  endued  with  
knowledge,  there is one who is Omniscient."  It is further  narrated  that Ibn 
Mas'ud  let Abu Musa  Al-Ash'ari  see his mistake  pertaining  to a certain  religious  
verdict,  thereupon  he said: "Ask me no more (to give you religious  verdicts)  so 
long as this learned  man (Ibn Mas'ud)  is living  among  you."  The occasion  of that 
was that Abu Musa,  who  was duly the governor  of Kufah,  was asked  about  a man  
who was killed while he was fighting  in Allah's  Cause,  thereupon  he gave his 
religious  verdict  that he would  be admitted  to the Garden.  Ibn Mas'ud  stood  and 
said: "Repeat  the same question  to the governor,  because  he might have not 
understood  it (in the first time)."  He repeated  the same  question,  and Abu Musa  
gave the same answer.  On that Ibn Mas'ud  said: "If he was killed while being  
sincere  and true (to his faith),  he would  enter  the Garden."  Abu Musa  said: "The  
truth is what he has said." As such the justice  and fairness  of a truth seeker  
should  be; and if a mention  of that is made  now to the slightest  jurisprudent  he 
would  disapprove  of it and render  it far, and say: "There  is no need to say that he 
has hit the mark,  since this is well-known  to everyone."  Consider  the debaters  of 
your time now: how the colour  of the face of anyone  of them  would  grow  black  
(out of grief)  if the truth becomes  clear on the tongue  of his opponent,  and how  
he would  disregard  it, and exert  his utmost  effort  to refute  it, and how he would  
criticize  along  his lifetime  the one who has silenced  him, and would  not feel shy 
of comparing  himself  with the holy companions  "Allah  be pleased  with them"  in 
the co-operation  for showing  the truth.
The seventh:  he (the debater)  should  not withhold  his helper  from moving86


Page 89:
Book  One:  Knowledge
from an argument  to another,  and from a problem  to another.  As such the 
debates  of the good ancestors  were. Furthermore,  he should  remove  from his 
argument  all innovated  subtides  of dialectics,  whether  in favour  or against  him,  
like his statement:  "It is not binding  upon me to mention  that" or "this  
contradicts  your first portion  of speech,  and thus it is unacceptable"  (and the like 
of that). However,  returning  to the truth  cancels  out falsehood,  and thus it should  
be said; and you know,  for certain,  that all the gatherings  are spent in debating  
and defending  one's  opinion,  until when  one deduces  a principle  from  pretended  
causes,  it is said to him: "What  evidence  do you have so your conclusion  should  
be accounted  for those causes?"  he says: "This is what has appeared  to me: if 
something  much  clearer  and more supporting  seems  to you, make  a mention  of 
it, perchance  I would  consider  it." The opponent  insists depending  upon the 
claim  that "It has several  meanings  other  than what you've  mentioned,  and since  
they are well-known  to me, it is not binding  upon  me to mention  them."  But the 
one who has brought  about this supporting  evidence  says: "It is imperative  to 
bring  about  what  you claim."  But the opponent  insists  that it is not binding  upon  
him to mention  them.  As such the assemblies  of argumentation  are pursued  by 
such questions,  while the poor debater  does not know that by his statement  "I 
know  it well, and it is not biding  upon  me to mention  it" he tells a lie against  law, 
for if he does not know  its meaning  which  he claims  only to demonstrate  the 
failure  of his adversary,  he will be a wicked  liar, who disobeys  Allah Almighty,  
and endangers  himself  to His Anger  with this false claim  of his; and if he is true 
to his claim,  he will prove  wicked,  for concealing  what he knows  of the matters  
of law, about  which  his Muslim  brother  has asked  in order  to understand  it, and 
examine  its validity,  for if he is strong  enough,  he will return  to it (in case it is 
valid),  and if he is weak,  his weakness  will be shown  to him, perchance  he will 
come out of the darkness  of ignorance  to the light of knowledge.  To be sure,  
there is no difference  that it is obligatory  upon a person  to disclose  such of 
matters  pertaining  to the religious  sciences  as he knows  whenever  he is asked  
about  them.  Thus,  the meaning  of his statement  "It is not binding  upon me to 
mention  that" is that it is not obligatory  upon  me to do so within  the framework  
of dialectics  which  we've  innovated,  according  to man's  curiosity  and desire  for 
deception  and battling  with speech.  That  is because  it is obligatory  by law, and if 
he refuses  to mention  it is either  a liar or a wicked.  Reflect  the consultations  of 
the holy companions  "Allah  be pleased  with them"  and the negotiations  held by 
the good  righteous  ancestors:  have  you heard  of anything  in them  which  is similar  
to this type of dialectics?  Have  anyone  of them  been  withheld  from  moving  from  
an argument  to another,  from making  an analogy  to relating  a tradition,  or from  
citing a narration  to quoting  a Qur'anic  Verse?  On the contrary,  all of their  
argumentations  were of this type in which  they used to mention  such of things  
and matters  as occurred  in their minds,  just in the same way and sequence  they  
occurred,  and they used to consider  them  all.
The eighth:  one should debate only with such men as endued  with  
knowledge,  from whom  benefit  is expected.  They frequently  are eager  to avoid87


Page 90:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
debating  with the intellectual  giants and those who are well-established  in 
knowledge,  for fear that the truth might  appear  at their tongues,  and they rather  
desire  for debating  with those  who are inferior  to them  in knowledge,  hoping  for 
confounding  them  with falsehood.
Beyond  those  eight  conditions  (which  render  the debate  permissible),  there  are 
so many  others,  but those  eight  mentioned  above  are sufficient  for leading  you to 
distinguish  those who debate  for the Sake of Allah,  and those who otherwise  
debate.  In short,  it should  be known  that whoever  does not debate  with Satan,  
even though  he is preoccupied  by him, since he is his most  virulent  adversary,  
who still calls him to go astray,  and rather  is engaged  in debating  with another  
one else over the questions,  in which  the one who does his best depending  upon  
his knowledge  to attain  the truth either  is right or at least shares  the reward  with  
him who is right,  is, by all means,  Satan's  ridicule  and the object  of admonition  to 
those  who are sincere  to receive  admonition.  For this reason,  Satan  gloats  over  
him because  of the darkness  of evils in which  he has dipped  him, which  we are 
going  to enumerate:  so, we ask Allah  Almighty  for the good  aid and success.
The Exposition  Of The Evils Of Debate  And The Destructive  
Qualities  Resulting  From  Them
It should  be known  with certainty  that debates  which  are designed  for the 
purpose  of overcoming  and silencing  an opponent  as well as for displaying  
one’s excellence  and honour,  bigheadedness  in the sight of people,  boasting,  
showing  off, or attracting  the elite, are the main sources  of all traits  which  are 
blameworthy  in the Sight  of Allah  and praiseworthy  in the sight  of Satan,  His 
avowed  enemy.  Its ascription  to the secret sins of pride, conceit,  jealousy,  
envy, self-justification,  love of power,  and others  is like the ascription  of 
drunkenness  to the apparent  sins of the body,  such as fornication,  launching  
false charges,  theft and murder.  Just as the person  who has been given the 
freedom  to choose  between  intoxication  and the other sins, regarded  the 
intoxication  as the slightest  which he took up only to be led by his 
intoxication  into committing  all the other  sins, so is he who surrenders  to the 
love of overcoming  and silencing  opponents  in debate,  and falls victim  of the 
desire for power  and boasting.  These things have led him to conceal  all 
wickedness  in his bosom  and motivated  in him all blameworthy  traits.  Proofs  
of the blameworthiness  of all these traits will be presented  in the Quarter  on 
the Destructives  although  we shall now refer to the major  evils stirred  up by 
debate.
From among  these, a mention  might  be made of envy: The Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: “The envy consume  the 
good deeds  in the same  way as fire consumes  the wood. ” The debater  could  not 
be free from envy because  at times he overcomes  his opponent  and at other  
times he himself  is overcome,  and at times his words  are praised  and at other  
times those of his opponent  are praised.  As long as there remains  in the world  
one famous  among  men for his versatility  and regarded  by the people  as one of88


Page 91:
Book  One: Knowledge  
better  knowledge  and keener  insight  than the debater,  the debater  will inescapably  
envy him and wish that the favours  which  he receives  might  vanish  from him,  
and the hearts of the people  might be diverted  from him, and rather  turned  
towards  him. To be sure, the envy is like the burning  fire, and if one is afflicted  
with it, he will live in the punishment  in this world,  even though  the punishment  
of the hereafter  is much more grievous  and more severe.  For this reason,  it is 
narrated  that Ibn Abbas  said: "Take  (and learn)  knowledge  wherever  you find it, 
and accept  not the sayings  of the jurisprudents  against  each other, for indeed,  
they are jealous  of one another  in the same  way as the bulls are in a cattle-fold."
Another  one of the blameworthy  traits  is arrogance  and pride  over the people.  
In this context,  it is narrated  that the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  him"  
said: "He, who shows  arrogance  and haughtiness,  Allah Almighty  puts him to 
humility;  and he, who shows  humility  (towards  others)  Allah  Almighty  raises  him 
up (in degree  and superiority)."  It is further  narrated  that the Messenger  of Allah  
"Peace  be upon him" said, relating  from Allah Almighty  (His statement):  "No  
doubt,  Magnificence  constitutes  My Lower  Garment,  and Majesty  constitutes  My 
Upper  Garment;  and if one disputes  with me over any of both,  surely,  I will smite  
him."89
The debater  could not be free from showing  arrogance  and pride over his 
fellows  and rivals,  and exalting  himself  beyond  his just and real estimate,  to the 
extent  that he and his colleagues  fight over their seats in the gatherings  and pride  
themselves  on the degree  of their elevation  or lowliness  as well as their closeness  
to, or farness  from the central  seat, and the precedence  to the way in narrow  
streets.  Often  the foolish,  deceitful,  and cunning  among  them  give good reason  
for their conduct  on the basis that they maintain  the honour  of knowledge  
because  the believer  has been forbidden  to put himself  to humiliation.  They  thus  
consider  humility,  which  Allah and his prophets  commended,  degradation  and 
regard  pride,  which  is blameworthy  in the Sight  of Allah,  the honour  of religion,  
In alteration  of the connotations  of these terms for the purpose  of putting  the 
people  to confusion,  like their perverting  the connotation  of other  terms  such as 
wisdom,  knowledge  and their  like.
The feeling  of resentment  is also one of those  blameworthy  traits,  from  which  
the debater  could  hardly  be free. In this respect,  it is narrated  that the Messenger  
of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "By no means  should  a faithful  believer  be 
resentful."  There  are such narrations  in condemnation  of resentment  as are not 
hidden.  You could hardly  find a debater,  who is unable  not to entertain  the 
feeling  of resentment  against  anyone  who would  even nod his head  in acceptance  
of the argument  of his adversary,  or would  not wait for him with politeness  to 
show his good attention  when he takes a pause in the middle  of his speech.  
Whenever  he sees that, he will be forced  to entertain  the feeling  of rancour;  and it 
is hypocrisy  which  lies behind  his persistence  in concealing  his rancour,  even  
though  in most  cases,  it inevitably  oozes  to be apparently  visible  on him; and how  
could he be free from that, since it is unimaginable  to guarantee  unanimous  
agreement  of all of the audience  upon his speech,  and approval  of all his


Page 92:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
conclusions  and deductions?  Moreover,  if his adversary  shows even the lest 
inconsideration  of his speech,  the feeling  of resentment  will be planted  in his 
heart  along  his life, which  he will never  uproot  from  himself  until the end of his 
life.90
Backbiting  also belongs  to those blameworthy  traits, which  Allah Almighty  
likens  to eating  the flesh of the dead.  However,  the debater  keeps  eating  the flesh  
of the dead,  as shown  from his indirect  reporting  of the speech  of his adversary,  
in an attempt  to traduce  him. As far as he is eager to be truthful  in relating  his 
speech,  he is mainly  concerned  with the portions  of his speech  which  show  only  
the points  of weakness  of his arguments,  and the inferiority  of his excellence;  and 
this is backbiting,  while lying is sheer calumny.  Furthermore,  the debater  could  
not keep his tongue  from dishonouring  anyone  who turns away from him and 
listens  to his opponent.  He would  even ascribe  to him ignorance,  foolishness,  
lack of understanding,  and stupidity.
Self-justification  belongs  to the blameworthy  traits. Allah Almighty  says: " 
Therefore  justify  not yourselves:  He knows  best who it is that guards  against  
evil." (An-Najm  32)
It was said to a wise man: "Which  kind of telling  the truth  is hateful?"  he said:  
"One's  praising  himself  (even though  it is justified)."  A debater,  in most cases,  
could  hardly  be far from  praising  himself  with his power,  the ability  to overcome  
his opponents,  and superiority  to his fellows.  He also could  hardly  be free from  
repeating  In the course  of a debate  he: “I am not of those from whom  all such  
things could be hidden ”, and “I am well-versed  in science,  of independent  
knowledge  of the foundations  of law, and retaining  tradition ”, and the like of 
that, with which  he would  sing his own praise,  sometimes  out of sheer  arrogance  
and at other times out of the need to make convincing  his words.  It is well-  
known  that arrogance  and self-praise  are condemned  by law and reason.
A mention  might  be made  also of spying  and prying  into the privates  of the 
people.  In this respect,  Allah Almighty  says: "And spy not on each other!"  
(Al-Hujurat  12)
A debater  could  hardly  be free from seeking  after and prying  into the faults  
and shortcomings  of his fellows  and opponents,  to the extent  that whenever  he is 
informed  of the arrival  of another  debater  in the town,  he delegates  somebody  to 
know  his innermost  states,  and disclose,  by way of questions,  his vices,  which  he 
takes  as ammunition  to use in scandalizing  and putting  him to shame  when  there  
is need for that. He goes as far as to discover  the states of his youth  and the 
defects  of his body,  perchance  he would  find an error  or imperfection  in his body  
such as baldness  and the like of it. Should  he fear the least defeat  at the hands  of 
his opponent,  he would, in the course of the debate, allude to these  
imperfections,  particularly  if his opponent  would  remain  firm and steadfast,  and


Page 93:
Book  One:  Knowledge
would  not refrain  from being  blunt  if he were  given  to insolence  and scorn.  Both  
of these practices  are regarded  as clever ways of repelling  the attacks  of 
opponent,  as it is narrated  about some of the well-known  and celebrated  
debaters.91
an
A further  trait of those blameworthy  is to rejoice  at the grief  of people,  and 
become  disheartened  at their  pleasure;  and to be sure,  when  one loves  not for his 
brother  what he loves for himself,  he becomes  far removed  from the good  
manners  of the faithful believers.  Everyone  who seeks after showing  his 
superiority  over the others feels depressed  at what pleases  and cheers  up his 
fellows  and rivals,  who rise up to him in excellence  and superiority.  The hatred  
which  exists  between  them  is like that which  exists  between  fellow-wives.  Just as 
the one wife would  tremble  and turn pale once  she sees her fellow-wife,  so would  
a debater  once he sees another:  the colour  of his (face) would  change  and his 
mind  would  be troubled  as if he had seen a strong  devil  or a hungry  wild animal.  
Where  are the companionship  and friendliness  which  used to exist between  the 
learned  men of religion  whenever  they met, and where  are the brotherhood,  the 
co-operation,  and the mutual  sharing  for which  they were well-known  at both  
times of prosperity  and adversity  ? it was this (extent  of companionship  and 
friendliness)  which led Ash-Shafi'i  to say: “Among  these of excellence  and 
wisdom,  knowledge  is like a bond of blood  relationship. ,, I cannot  understand  
how some men, among  whom  knowledge  has created  a deep-rooted  enmity,  
claim  they have followed  his steps. Can any spirit of friendliness  be expected  to 
prevail  among  them  when  they seek after  overcoming  each other  and boasting  of 
that? How  unlikely!  It is sufficient  for bad that such an evil enjoins  upon  you the 
traits of the hypocrites  and deprives  you of those of the faithful  believers  and 
pious  men!
Hypocrisy  also is one of those blameworthy  traits, and there is no need of 
evidence  to criticize  and condemn  it. Nevertheless,  they are in need of it in their  
debates,  for when they meet their adversaries,  lovers  and devotees,  they could  
find no way but to make themselves  lovable  to them by good speech,  and 
showing  longing  for them, and high estimation  for their positions  and lives.  
However,  both the giver and receiver  of speech,  and all of those  who listen to 
them, know for certain  that all of this is out of lie, falsity, hypocrisy,  and 
insolence.  They show  love to each other only with their tongues,  even though  
mutual  hatred  lurks in their hearts.  We seek refuge  with Allah Almighty  from  
them.  (It is narrated  by Tabarani  on the authority  of Salman  that) the Messenger  
of Allah said: "If the people  learn knowledge,  and leave doing  deeds,  Endear  
themselves  to each other  only with their tongues,  even though  their hearts  seethe  
with mutual  hatred,  and sever  relations  with each other,  Allah  Almighty  then will 
them,  and make  them  deaf  and blind."  This narration  is transmitted  by Al- curse
Hassan,  and in confirmation  to its truthfulness,  this case was seen and witnessed.
Another  blameworthy  trait is to disdain  from  accepting  the truth,  and detest  it, 
and persist  in disputation  about  it. to be sure, the emergence  of the truth on the 
tongue  of a debater's  opponent  is the most  reprehensible  to him. Henceforth,  he


Page 94:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
would  do his best to refute  it, and strive  his utmost  to deny  it and would  exert  his 
greatest  effort  in deception,  trickery  and fraud  in order  to repel  his adversary  until  
disputation  becomes  customary  to him by nature.  He hears nothing  but that he 
expresses  his objection  to it immediately.  This habit  of his would  even drive  him 
to dispute  the truths  of the Qur ’an and the words  of law and would  cause  him to 
cite the one in contradiction  of the other.  Therefore,  wrangling  even in opposing  
falsity  is prohibited  since the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" exhorted  
men to abandon  it even though  they were right in their disputation.  In this 
respect,  (It is narrated  by both At-Tirmidhi  and Ibn Majah  on the authority  of 
Anas Ibn Malik that) The Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be 
upon him” said: “He, who leaves  disputation,  seeing  that he is on falsehood,  a 
palace  in one side of the Garden  will be constructed  for him; and he, who leaves  
argumentation  (with  others)  even though  he is on the right,  the same  will be built  
for him in the highest  part of the Garden. ” Allah  Almighty  makes  the one who  
tells lies about  Allah on equal footing  with him who gives lie to the truth as 
shown  form His statement:  "And  who does more  wrong  than he who invents  a 
lie against  Allah  or rejects  the Truth  when  it reaches  him? Is there  not a home  in 
Hell for those  who reject  Faith?"  (Al-Ankabut  68)92
He Almighty  further  says: "And who does more wrong than he who  
invents  a lie against  Allah or gives lie to the Truth  when  it comes  to him?"  
(Az-Zumar  32)
jGc\c>- ^1 (3u^)b  OJLi-aj 4j)l Ujia  ^ ^
< 0 <4 J-i 1
Another  trait of such kind is showing  off and flattering  people  in an attempt  
to attract  and mislead  them. Showing  off is that potent  disease  which  leads to 
committing  the greatest  of the major sins as will be treated  in the Book of 
showing  off. Of a surety,  the real intention  of a debater  is but to show  off before  
the people,  and attract  their  tongues  to run with praises  over him.
Those  are ten traits,  which  belong  to the fundamental  secret  sins. Others,  who  
lack self-restraint  may be involved  in controversies  which  lead to the exchange  of 
blows, kicking,  boxing,  tearing  garments,  plucking  beards, cursing  parents,  
denouncing  teachers,  and outright  slander.  Such people  are not enumerated  
among  the respectable  men. The prominent  and clear-headed  celebrities  among  
them are not free from the preceding  ten traits, even though  they do not go 
beyond  them. One may be free of any of those traits with regard  to those to 
whom  he is inferior  or those  to whom  he is superior,  or with regard  to those  who  
are outside  his town or far from his conditions  of living.  But even, in no way 
could  a debater  be free from all these  traits  with regard  to his attitude  towards  his 
fellows,  who are equal to him in position.  Out of each of these ten traits, ten


Page 95:
Book  One: Knowledge
other  vices might  be ramified,  which  we shall neither  discuss  nor explain  with  
detail  at the present  time. They  include  self-importance,  anger,  hatred,  greed,  the 
desire  to seek wealth  and majesty  in order  to overcome  others,  boasting,  gaiety,  
arrogance,  exalting  the wealthy  and those endued  with the power  of authority,  
frequenting  their places and taking  from their unlawful  riches,  parading  with  
horses,  state-coaches,  and forbidden  garments,  despising  people  by being  vain  
and ostentatious,  meddling  in the affairs of others,  involvement  in so much  
useless  talks, the disappearance  of awe, fear and mercy  from the heart,  absent-  
mindedness  to an extent  that the praying  one does not know  what  he has prayed,  
or recited,  or whom  he has communed  with during  his prayer,  nor does he 
entertain  any feeling  of humility  in his heart,  despite  the fact that he had spent  his 
life in the study  of those sciences  which  are helpful  in debate  but are useless  in 
the hereafter,  such as the embellishment  of phraseology  and the knowledge  of 
singular  anecdotes,  and the like of that of those things  which  are countless,  in 
which  the debaters  vary according  to their different  ranks  and degrees;  and even  
the most  religious  and the wisest  among  them,  could  hardly  be free from  many  of 
them.  Nevertheless,  the aspiration  of everyone  is to conceal  them and, through  
self-mortification,  free himself  from them.
It should  be also known  that these  vices are characteristic  of those  involved  in 
giving  admonition  and warning  if their purpose  is to be well-known  and well-  
established  in prestige,  or to obtain wealth and position.  They also are 
characteristic  of those who are engaged  in the science  of religion  and legal  
verdicts  if their aspiration  is to secure  a position  in the office  of judge  or become  
trustees  of endowments  or to excel their fellows.  In general,  these vices are 
characteristic  of him who seeks, through  knowledge,  anything  other than the 
reward  of Allah Almighty  in the hereafter.  To be sure, the science  does not 
neglect  the learned  man so much as it leads him to permanent  destruction  or 
permanent  life. For this reason,  the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him"  
said: "The one who will receive  the most grievous  torment  from amongst  the 
people  on the Day of  Judgement  is a learned  man,  whom  Allah  Almighty  benefits  
not by his knowledge."  It however  does not only benefit  him, but also it causes  
harm  to him. Would  that he has saved  from  its evil; and how far it is! No doubt,  
the danger  of knowledge  is very grievous,  and its seeker  indeed  pursues  the well-  
established  dominion  and abiding  bliss, and it is for this reason  that he could  
hardly  be free from being  doomed  either  to dominion  or destruction.  He is like 
the seeker  after dominion  in this world:  if he does not succeed  to get wealth,  he 
would have no desire for being saved from humiliation  of poverty.  On the 
contrary,  he would  continue  to live in the midst  of the worst  conditions.
But even,  if you say that in giving  concession  to debate  there  lies an advantage,  
i.e. to exhort  people  to seek knowledge  since  without  ambition  for power  and the 
rivalry  which  it provokes,  all branches  of knowledge  would  have vanished,  you 
are true only in one respect.  That ’s because  had it been for their expectation  of 
playing  with the ball, mallet  and birds, the boys would  have had no desire  for 
going to school.  But this does not mean that the reasons  for the school ’s93


Page 96:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
popularity  are praiseworthy.  Similarly  had it not been for the love of power,  
knowledge  would  not have survived:  it does not mean  that the seeker  after  power  
is saved.  On the contrary  he is one of those  whom  the Prophet  "Peace  be upon  
him" described  when he said (according  to the narration  of An-Nasa'i  on the 
authority  of Anas):  “Verily  Allah  Almighty  will support  this religion  through  men  
who have no faith.” He "Peace  be upon him" further  said (according  to the 
narration  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah):  "No doubt,  Allah Almighty  will 
support  this religion  through  even a wicked  man."  Verily,  the seeker  after power  
will inevitably  die, even  though  he might  be of benefit  to another  one, particularly  
if his call is to leave  the (vanities  and delights  of) this world.  This is true of him,  
whose  outward  state seems  to be like that of the early men of knowledge,  while  
inwardly  he conceals  his ambitions.  He is, in this respect,  like the candle  which  
bums  itself  out in order  that others  may see. The good  of others  lies in his own  
destruction.  On the other  hand if he should  urge people  to cherish  this world  he 
would  be like the fire which,  besides  consuming  everything,  burns  itself  out as 
well.94
In brief, the learned  men of knowledge  are of three types: those who ruin 
themselves  and cause destruction  to others,  and this applies  to those who  
publicize  the seeking  after the (vanities  and delights  of) this world,  to which  they  
turn;  those  who cause  happiness  to themselves  as well as to the other  people,  and 
this applies  to those who call to Allah Almighty,  outwardly  and inwardly;  and 
those  who ruin themselves,  even though  they cause  happiness  to others,  and this 
applies  to those, who call others to the hereafter,  and outwardly  reject the 
(vanities  and delights  of) this world,  although  their inward  intention  is to attract  
the people  and establish  prestige  and majesty.
Consider  then to which  of those types you belong,  and whom  you regard  in 
your work.  Think  not that Allah  Almighty  accepts  but such of deeds  and works  
as are done sincerely  for His Countenance.  In the book  of showing  off, if not in 
all the books  of the quarter  of the destructives,  you will be provided  with what  
will remove  suspicion  from  you, Allah  Willing.
CHAPTER  FIVE:  ON THE PROPRETIES  
OF BOTH  LEARNER  AND TEACHER
There  are several  duties  characteristic  of the learner,  which  might  be divided  
into ten:
The first duty : to give preference  to the purity  of the soul over the vicious  
manners  and blameworthy  characteristics.  Knowledge  (of Allah  Almighty)  is the 
service  of the heart,  the prayer  of the innermost,  and the means  which  brings  one 
inwardly  much  closer  to the Presence  of Allah  Almighty.  As well as prayer,  which  
is the function  of the organs,  is not valid unless  they should  be purified  from  
filth, the service  and construction  of the heart through  knowledge  are not valid  
unless the heart should be purified  from all vicious  manners  and wicked  
characteristics.  In this context,  the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said:  
"Faith  has been based  upon purity."  This should  be done outwardly  as well as


Page 97:
Book  One:  Knowledge  
inwardly.  Allah  Almighty  says: "Verily,  the pagans  are unclean."  (At-Tawbah  28)
013 I I L*jJ iyiukVt. S- ySJ' ^
4 (?§3 ^ ^ ^ • J1 c l-L (jj t.4j_^a3 <Ui I aIIp JLJL> s
This  is to stir up the hearts  and minds  to be concerned  with purification.
To be sure, impurity  is not limited  to what  is outwardly  visible  and perceptible  
by senses,  since a pagan might be of clean garment  and body, but inwardly  
unclean  and stained  with filth. Filth applies  to all of what  should  be avoided  and 
abandoned  in general,  and the vicious  characteristics  of the inward  in particular,  
for besides  their being wicked  at the moment,  they will be destructive  in the 
future.  In this respect,  the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  him" said (on the 
authority  of Abu Talhah  Al-Ansari):  "The angels  never  enter a house  in which  
there is a dog."  The heart  is like the house  to act as an abode  for the angels,  to 
which they descend  and reside. The evil characteristics  such as anger, lust,  
rancour,  envy,  arrogance  and haughtiness  are like barking  dogs:  how then should  
the angels  enter  into it, since it is filled with those dogs, seeing  that the light of 
knowledge  could hardly  be inspired  by Allah into the hearts but through  the 
angels?  " It is not fitting  for a man that Allah should  speak to him except  by 
inspiration,  or from behind  a veil, or by the sending  of a Messenger  to reveal,  
with Allah's  permission,  what  Allah  wills: for He is Most  High,  Most  Wise."  (Ash-  
Shura  51)
tCio C ^5 SSy.  j' o? j1 *5J *1)1 <1^0  • $
" 4 , j* *-
It is the entrusted  angels who undertake  inspiring  such of sciences  of 
knowledge  as are sent by Allah into the hearts:  they are those holy, purified,  
faultless,  who are free from all blameworthy  sins. They never  observe  or watch  
but what is good, nor inhabit  with what they have of the treasures  of Allah's  
Mercy  but what  is good  and pure. But I do not say that the house  is intended  by 
the heart, and the anger and the like of it from amongst  the blameworthy  
characteristics  by the dog, but I rather  say that this refers  to that.
In this way,  we can say that there  is a difference  between  intending  the hidden  
concept  of words through  their literal meaning  and incidentally  referring  to a 
hidden  meaning  while  affirming  the apparent  meaning.  This subtle  point  is what  
distinguishes  the Batinites  from the true believers.  This is the method  of 
consideration,  which  is the way of the learned  and the righteous.  Consideration  
then means  that what  has already  been mentioned  connotes  something  else and 
thus both should  be considered,  like a wise man who may witness  a calamity  
befalling  somebody  else other than him and the calamity  would  alarm him, in 
such a way as to draw  his attention  to the fact that he is vulnerable  to calamities  
and that time is full of vicissitudes.
Thus  to turn one ’s attention  from the consideration  of the affairs  of others  to 
those  of his own and from those  of his own to the nature  of the things  of this95
4 © ^


Page 98:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
world is a praiseworthy  way of consideration.  Proceed,  therefore,  from the 
consideration  of the house  built by the people  to the heart,  which  is the house  
constructed  by Allah  Almighty,  and from  the consideration  of the dog which  has 
been pronounced  blameworthy,  not for its physical  appearance  but for its 
inherent  beastly  characteristics  and impurity,  to that of the animal  spirit  which  is 
bestiality.
It should  be known  that he whose heart is saturated  with anger, greed,  
indulgence,  and readiness  to slander  people  is a beast as far as content  is 
concerned,  although  a human  being  as far as form is concerned.  However,  the 
light of insight  regards  the real meaning  of things and not their form. In this 
world forms prevail  over the real meanings  which  lie within  them, but in the 
hereafter  forms  will comply  with real meanings  and the latter  will prevail.  For this 
reason  every  individual  will be resurrected  according  to his own spiritual  reality:  
the slanderer  will be resurrected  in the form of a vicious  dog; the greedy,  a wild wolf,  
the haughty,  a tiger, and the seeker  after power,  a lion. This is attested  by so many  
narrations,  and confirmed  by those  of insight  and discerning.
You might  say that many  students  of bad character  have sought  and acquired  
the knowledge  of the sciences.  That may be so, but how far they are from real 
knowledge  which  is useful  in the hereafter  and which  guarantees  happiness!  The  
first characteristic  of that true knowledge  is that even a elementary  grasp of it 
would  show  that sin is a fatal and destructive  poison.  And have you ever seen  
anyone  take anything  which  he knew  to be fatally  poisonous?  As to what  you 
hear from the sophists  it is nothing  but (forged)  traditions  which they  
fabricate  and utter  with their  tongues  so many  times,  and repeat  in their  hearts  
so many  times:  it is no science  at all. Ibn Mas ‘ud "Allah  be pleased  with him"  
said: “Knowledge  is not to retain prolific  narrations  but a light which is 
inspired  into the heart. ” Others,  having  in mind the statement  of Allah  
Almighty  “It is these endued  with knowledge  from  amongst  His servants  that 
fear Allah  most ” (Fatir  28)96
^ ollf  llil diJ’ir
Are of the opinion  that knowledge  is the fear of Allah.  He alludes  here to the 
fruits  of knowledge;  and it is for this reason  that one of the scholars  said that the 
meaning  of the following  statement  “We sought  knowledge  for other  purposes  
than the glory  but Allah  but knowledge  rejected  but to be for Allah  alone”  is that 
knowledge  has resisted  our efforts  to grasp  it and thus its truth  was not disclosed  
to us and all we acquired  was its words  and terms.
But you might say that several  well-learned  men and jurisprudents  have  
excelled  in the principles  and branches  of law and applied  jurisprudence  and have  
been considered  authorities  thereon,  while they are of blameworthy  traits from  
which  they never  purified  themselves.  I will argue  then that had you known  the 
relative  ranks  of the sciences  as well as the value  of the science  of the hereafter,


Page 99:
Book  One:  Knowledge
you would have realized  that the sciences  to which they have addressed  
themselves  are of little avail as knowledge  but are of use merely  as deeds  
provided  that they are sought  as means  with which  to come  much  closer  to the 
Presence  of Allah.  This last point  has already  been  referred  to, and it will again  be 
discussed  later.
The second  duty: a learner  should  reduce  to a minimum  his ties with the 
affairs  of the world  and leave his kin and country  because  such ties occupy  one’s 
time and divert  his attention.  However,  never  has Allah  given  a man two hearts,  
and the more  the mind  distributes  its attention  among  several  things  the less able 
it is to comprehend  the truth. For this reason  it is said: “Knowledge  will 
surrender  nothing  to man unless  man surrenders  the whole  of his entity  to it.” 
Even when you devote  yourself  wholeheartedly  to it, attaining  any of it is not 
guaranteed.  This mind which  distributes  its attention  among  different  things  is 
like a stream  the water  of which  flows  in several  directions  only to be absorbed  in 
part by the earth and in part by the air with the result that nothing  is left for 
irrigation  of planted  lands.
The third duty: a learner  should  neither  scorn  knowledge  nor exalt himself  
over the teacher,  but rather  entrust  to him the conduct  of his affairs  and submit  
to his advice  just as the simple  patient  would  submit  to a sympathetic  and clever  
physician.  He should  humble  himself  before  his teacher  and seek reward  and 
honour  through  his service.  In this respect,  it is narrated  by ash-Sha ‘bi that once  
Zaid Ibn Thabit  finished  from offering  a funeral  prayer,  and his mule was 
brought  to him and as he was about  to mount  it Ibn Abbas  rushed  and held the 
stirrup  for him. Thereupon  Zaid said: “Bother  not yourself  O paternal  cousin  of 
the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him"! ” Ibn Abbas  replied:  “Thus  have  we 
been commanded  to treat the learned  and the illustrious. ” Zaid bent over and 
kissed  his hand  and said: “Thus  have  we been ordered  to venerate  the kinship  of 
our Prophet  "Peace  be upon  him". ”
The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" further  said: “It is not out of 
the manners  of a faithful  believer  to flatter  anyone  except  when he is seeking  
after knowledge. ” The seeker  after knowledge  then should  not exalt himself  over  
his teacher.  One manifestation  of such arrogance  is his reluctance  to submit  but 
to the popular  and well-known  teachers.  This is evident  foolishness  because  
knowledge  is the way to salvation  and happiness.  However,  anyone  who is trying  
to escape  from the claws  of a threatening  wild animal  would  not mind,  as long  as 
he is saved,  whether  he is guided  to a place  of safety  by a well-known  celebrity  or 
by an anonymous  person.
The torture  which  the flames  of hell fire inflict  upon  those  who are ignorant  
of Allah are more severe  than any which  the lions of the jungle  are capable  of 
inflicting.  Wisdom,  therefore,  is the required  goal of every believer,  which  he 
should  seize  wherever  he finds  it, and become  grateful  to anyone  who conveys  it 
to him, no matter  who the person  might  be. For this reason  it has been said:  
“Knowledge  humbles  the haughty  youth,  As the flood  washes  away  the hill."
Thus knowledge  is not attained  except  through  showing  humbleness  and97


Page 100:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
harkening.  Allah Almighty  says: <fVerily  in this is a Message  for any that has a 
heart and understanding  or who gives ear and earnesdy  witnesses  (the truth). ”98
(Qaf  37)
i @ (LLUi  Jdf  jidJi  J Oj }
This statement  refers to the person  who has the faculty  of understanding  
knowledge  but fails to grasp  it unless  he opens  his ears and heart  and attentively,  
humbly,  thankfully,  gladly,  and gratefully  receives  whatever  he is told. Let a 
learner  be to his teacher  like the soft soil which  has received  heavy  rain and 
completely  absorbed  it. Let him follow  whatever  the teacher  should  guide  him to 
do, as far as learning  is concerned,  putting  aside his own opinion  since his 
teacher ’s faults  are of more  benefit  to him than his own right  judgment  is because  
experience  reveals  details  which might be strange  even though  they are very  
useful.
Many  are the physicians  who may treat a patient  suffering  from  fever  with hot 
medicines  and drinks  in order to strengthen  his resistance  to endure  the shock  
resulting  from the remedy.  Because  of his ignorance,  the inexperienced  one 
would  be amazed  by this treatment.  Allah  draws  the attentions  to this possibility  
through  the story of Al-Khadir  and Moses  "Peace  be upon them"  in which  Al- 
Khadir  said, addressing  Moses:  "Verily  you will not be able to have patience  with  
me! And how can you have patience  about things about which your  
understanding  is not complete?"  (Al-Kahf  67:68)
4 ^ 'JS' yyaliJcLSj  (£|p \j^> JLbj Jli ^
He then allowed  Moses  to follow  him on condition  that the latter  would  keep  
silent  and ask no questions,  and said: "If you follow  me, ask me not of aught  until  
I have  given  you an account  thereof.”  (Al-Kahf : 70)
i I© & ^ ^
But even Moses  waited  not and rather persisted  to raise questions  to Al- 
Khadir  with the result  that they had to leave one another.  In short,  be sure that 
every  learner,  who  would  stick  to his own opinion  and choice  in defiance  to those  
of his teacher,  is doomed  to disappointment  and failure.
But if you argue that Allah  Almighty  says: "Ask then those endued  with  
knowledge  if you know  not" (An-Nahl  43)
\plZJ ^JJ ij-y  *3] lllljl  L*3
4 0*5  oJ iSA'
Which  means  that we are commanded  to raise questions  (about  what  we know  
not), it should  be known  to you that it is true but only of the things  concerning  
which  the teacher  gives permission  to open the gate of questions.  It is known  
that it is blameworthy  to ask questions  about that which is beyond  your  
understanding  according  to your rank (as a student);  and it is for this that Moses


Page 101:
Book  One: Knowledge
"Peace  be upon him" was forbidden  by Al-Khadir  to raise questions.  In other  
words,  you should  leave  asking  a question  before  its due time,  and the teacher  has 
better  knowledge  of that which  is fitting  for you to understand,  and of the due 
time of revelation;  and as well as it is not time for revelation,  it is accordingly  not 
time for asking  about  it.
Ali "Allah  be pleased  with him" said in this respect:  "One  of the rights  which  a 
learned  men of knowledge  should  have  is that you should  not bother  him with so 
much  questions,  nor expect  him to give you answers  to all the questions,  nor be 
importunate  (that he should  give you more)  whenever  he proves  unenergetic,  nor 
pull his garment  whenever  he stands  up (to leave),  nor disclose  a secret  for him,  
nor backbite  anyone  in his presence,  nor seek after his stumble,  and in case he 
slips,  you should  accept  his excuse;  and you should  venerate  and cherish  him just 
for the Sake of Allah Almighty  as long as he preserves  the religion  of Allah  
Almighty.  Furthermore,  sit not before  him, and if he has a need, you should  
precede  the people  to fulfill  it."
The fourth  duty: he who pursues  knowledge,  no matter  the sciences  of this 
world,  or the sciences  of the hereafter  they might  be, should  avoid,  at least in the 
beginning  of acquisition,  the difference  of opinions  among  the people.  However,  
this would perplex  his mind, bewilder  his understanding,  and disperse  his 
opinion,  and disappoint  him from  perception  and acquaintance.  On the contrary,  
he should  first have a perfect  grasp of the one way and doctrine,  which is 
satisfactory  to his teacher,  and after that, he might pay his attention  to the 
different  doctrines  and questionable  ideas; and in case his teacher  is not 
independent  in his opinion,  and is in the habit  of narrating  so many  and differen  
doctrines  and opinions,  he should  be cautious  of him, for he would  be misleading  
more  than guiding  (to the truth).
To be sure, a blind  is not fitting  for leading  and gliding  the blind  persons  (to 
the right  way).  One in such a state becomes  in the blindness  of confusion  and the 
wilderness  of ignorance.  Holding  back the beginner  of learning  from paying  his 
attention  to the suspicious  ideas  is equal  to preventing  the newly  convert  to Islam  
from mixing  with the infidels  and pagans,  as well as exhorting  the experienced  
one to consider  the points  of difference  is equal  to inducing  the one who is well-  
established  in faith to mix with the infidels  and pagans.  For this reason,  the 
coward  one is prevented  from attacking  the rows of fighting  infidels,  to which  
only the brave  one is urged.  Heedless  of this subtle  point,  some feeble-minded  
persons  thought  that it is permissible  for them  to follow  the strong  ones in some  
of their lenient  attitudes  towards  certain  matters  of questionable  ideas, not 
knowing  that the duties  of the strong  ones are very different  from those of the 
weak  ones.
So, one of them said: "He, who sees me in the beginning  (of the journey),  will 
be a truly faithful  believer;  and he, who sees me in the end (of the journey)  will 
come to be an unrighteous.  That is because  the end (of the journey)  always  
changes  the deeds to be done inwardly,  while quietens  the organs  but from  
performing  the obligations,  which  might seem to the viewers  as being out of 
laziness,  idleness  and negligence;  and how far this is! For this end makes  the heart99


Page 102:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
firmly  attached  to Him in His Witness  and presence,  and keep celebrating  His 
Praises  which  is the best of deeds regularly  and permanendy.  The weak one's  
imitation  of the strong  in what apparently  seems  to him to be a slip is like the 
excuse  of the one who throws  a bit of filth in a jug, justifying  his conduct  that so 
many  times  of that little filth is thrown  into the sea; and since the sea is so much  
greater  than a jug, what  is applicable  to it is more applicable  to the jug. But this 
poor one does not know that the sea with its strength  changes  this filth into 
water,  and thus,  what  is filth turns to acquire  the water's  attribute.  But this is not 
true of the jug, for the little filth in it prevails  over its contents,  and gives it its 
attribute.
For a similar  reason,  what was made permissible  for the Messenger  of Allah  
"Peace  be upon  him" was made  not for anyone  else. He was given  concession  to 
marry  nine women,  for he was strong  enough  to be just and fair to all of his 
women,  no matter  great they might  be in number.  But anyone  else could  hardly  
be just to all of his wives;  and in many  cases, he might  incline  to some of his 
wives  more  than the others,  which  leads  him to be disobedient  to Allah  Almighty,  
while seeking  their good pleasure.  So, not prosperous  be him, who compares  
angels  with smiths.
The fifth duty: the seeker after knowledge  should  not leave any of the 
praiseworthy  sciences  but that he should  consider  it in such a way as to be 
acquainted  with its purpose  and finality.  If his life is long enough  to help him, let 
him then be well-versed  in it, otherwise,  let him be engaged  in what is more  
important  thoroughly,  and in the others  partly.  Indeed,  the sciences  of knowledge  
are co-operative,  and connected  with each other,  and the benefit  he receives  from  
his going  through  any of those  sciences  is that he will have no aversion  towards  it 
because  of his ignorance  of it. However,  man is an adversary  to what he knows  
not.100
In confirmation  to that, Allah  Almighty  says: "and seeing  that they guide  
lot themselves  thereby,  they will say, "This  is an (old),  old falsehood!""  (Al- 
Ahqaf  11)
/ ^ x , > * / -
According  to a poetic  verse: "He, who has ailment  in his mouth,  finds even  
the fresh and sweet  water  of bitter  taste."  The sciences  then, according  to their  
different  ranks,  are either  to lead one to the way of Allah Almighty,  or to help  
him partly follow the way, and they have different  positions  in relation  to 
nearness  and farness  from the real purpose;  and those  who undertake  them are 
guards,  like the guards  of openings  of the borders,  and each has a special  rank,  
and according  to his degree,  he will receive  a reward  in the Garden,  if he intends  
therewith  just the Countenance  of Allah.
The sixth  duty:  he should  not pursue  each science  thoroughly  all at once: he 
should  rather  observe  the sequence,  beginning  from what is most important.  In 
no way could  one's lifetime,  no matter  long it might  be, extend  to enable  one to 
acquire  all sciences.  For this reason,  he should  take the best of each science,  
satisfying  oneself,  so to speak,  with the mere tasting  of it while  directing  whatever


Page 103:
Book  One: Knowledge
power  one has left, and devote  his entire  power  of mind,  after having  obtained  
such of knowledge  as is available  to him, to have full mastery  of the knowledge  of 
the hereafter,  which  is the best and most honourable  of all sciences,  i.e. the two 
divisions  of practical  religion  and revelation,  since the final objective  of practical  
religion  is to reach  the point  of revelation,  and the final objective  of revelation  is 
to have knowledge  of Allah  Almighty.
I do not mean  by it the faith which  is picked  up by the common  person  by 
way of inheritance  or by acquisition,  nor the way of dialectics  and debate  in 
defense  of it from the evasive  arguments  of the opponents,  as it is the final  
objective  of the theologian;  but it is a certainty  of faith, and a fruit of light  
inspired  by Allah Almighty  in the heart of a servant,  whose  inward  has been  
purified  from vices by self- mortification,  until he attains  the high rank of faith of 
Abu Bakr "Allah  be pleased  with him",  whose  faith would  overbalance  the faith  
of all the people  of the worlds  if it is weighed  by it, as is attested  by (the 
Messenger  of Allah)  the chief  of all human  beings  "Peace  be upon  him".
In my sight,  the belief  of a common  person,  and systematized  by a theologian,  
who does not excel the common  one except  in the matter  of stringing  words  
together,  and it is for this that his art is called  theology,  was beyond  the capability  
of Umar,  Uthman  and Ali, and the holy companions  "Allah  be pleased  with  
them"  in total. But even,  Abu Bakr excelled  them  by virtue  of that secret  which  
resided  in his breast.  It is astounding  that although  one hears that from the 
legislator  "Peace  be upon him", he despises  what he hears similarly  and alleges  
that it belongs  to the heresies  of Sufists,  and it is unreasonable.  So, you should  be 
careful  of that, otherwise  you would  loose your capital.  Be then eager to have  
knowledge  of the mystery  which  is beyond  the possessions  of jurisprudents  and 
theologians;  and nothing  could  guide  you to it but your  carefulness  of pursuit.
In total, the best and the most  honourable  and the final objective  of sciences  
is the knowledge  of Allah  Almighty.  It is an ocean,  whose  furthest  depth  could  
not be attainable.  It is the Prophets  from amongst  all the human  beings  who  
achieve  the highest  rank therein,  followed  by the saints  and holy ones, followed  
by those  who succeed  them.  It is narrated  that a portrait  of two from  among  the 
early sages was seen in a mosque,  and there was a scroll  in the hand of one of 
them,  in which  the following  was written:  "If you become  perfect  in all things,  
think not that you have become  perfect  in anything  until you should  have full 
knowledge  of Allah  Almighty,  and be sure that He is the Causer  of causes,  and 
the One Who causes  all things to exist." In the hand of the other one, the 
following  was written  (in a scroll):  "Before  I know Allah Almighty,  I used to 
drink and become  thirsty;  and when  I have known  Him, I came to be satisfied  
with no drinking."
The seventh  duty: one should  not pursue  a certain  art of science  before  he 
becomes  fully versed  in that which  is prior to it in rank. However,  the sciences  
are fundamentally  arranged  in such a way that each paves the way to the other,  
and leads to that which  follows  it in rank;  and successful  is he, who observes  this 
arrangement  and gradation.  Allah  Almighty  says: " Those  to whom  we have sent101


Page 104:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
the Book  study  it as it should  be studied:  they are the ones that believe  therein."  
(Al-Baqarah  121)
cr*i ‘-ti
It refers  to those  who does not go beyond  a certain  art before  they are perfect  
in knowing  and acting  upon it. Furthermore,  let his intention  in any science  he 
seeks  after to rise to that which  is superior  in rank. On the other  hand,  he should  
not judge that a certain  science  is corrupt  just because  of difference  among  its 
protagonists,  nor because  of some errors committed  by one or more of its 
people,  nor because  of the fact that the deeds  of some do not confirm  to their  
knowledge  of it.
You see, for example,  that a group of people  have left the science  of 
philosophy  and jurisprudence,  excusing  themselves  on the grounds  that had they  
had truths in themselves,  they would have been comprehended  by its 
protagonists;  and all of those  suspicions  have  been  explained  in detail  in the book  
"the Standard  of Science".  Another  group might relinquish  medicine,  only  
because  of an error  in which  a physician  has fallen,  which  they have seen. Others  
think  the astrology  is right,  just because  an astrologer  happens  to be right  in many  
cases,  while  others  think  it is false just because  an astrologer  happens  to be wrong  
in many  cases;  and of a surety,  both are false. That's  because  the reality  of each  
science  should  be known  and judged  in itself, for it is not true that each person  
could independendy  embrace  every branch  of knowledge.  For this reason,  Ali 
"Allah  be pleased  with him" said: "Accept  not the truth only from men: on the 
contrary,  if you know  the truth first, you will know  its real protagonists."
The eighth  duty: he should  know the reason,  for which  the best and 
most  honourable  of all sciences  is attained;  and this refers  to two things:  the 
first is the honour  of its fruit,  and the other  is the authenticity  and power  of 
its evidences  and proofs.  Take, for example,  both sciences  of religion  and 
medicine:  the fruit of the former  is the hereafter  never-ending  life, while  the 
fruit of the latter is the perishing  life of this world;  and in this way, the 
science of religion  is more honourable.  Take also both sciences  of 
mathematics  and astronomy:  of a surety,  mathematics  is more  honourable  in 
view of the authenticity  and power  of its evidences  and proofs.  But, if 
mathematics  is compared  with medicine,  the latter  will be more honourable  
in relation  to its fruit, even though  mathematics  is more honourable  in 
relation  to its evidences  and proofs.
Since consideration  of the fruit is more significant,  medicine  is more  
honourable  even though  it depends  mostly  upon guessing.  From this point of 
view, it is clear that the most honourable  of sciences  is to have knowledge  of 
Allah Almighty,  His angels,  Messengers  and Scriptures,  as well as to have  
knowledge  of the way to these  sciences.  So, seek not but it, and be eager  not but 
to pursue  it.102


Page 105:
Book  One:  Knowledge
The ninth  duty: the learner's  purpose  should  be: at the time to adorn  and 
beautify  his inward  with virtues,  and in the future,  to come  much  closer  to the 
Presence  of Allah Almighty,  and rise up to the neighbourhood  of the highest  
assembly  of angels  and cherubim.  This means  that his purpose  should  not be to 
acquire  power,  wealth,  and majesty,  or to debate  the foolish  and weak-minded,  or 
to vie in glory  with his fellows.  Should  this be his real purpose,  let him then seek  
such of sciences  as is the closest  to it, i.e. the knowledge  of the (way to the) 
hereafter.  But even, he should  not despise  the other sciences,  such as that of 
giving  religious  verdicts,  Arabic  grammar  and the language  of those related  to 
both the Holy  Book  and the Sunnah,  and the like of those  which  we mentioned  
in the preliminary  and supplementary  sciences,  which  belong  to the collective  
duties.
Understand  not that our overestimation  of the science  of the hereafter  should  
lead to underestimation  of the other sciences.  However,  those who undertake  
those sciences  are like those who vigilantly  and firmly stand to protect  the 
outposts  of Islam,  and those  who fight in the Cause  of Allah:  as well as some  of 
them are active  fighters,  some are on the reserve,  some are in charge  of water  
supplies  to the soldiers,  and some  take care of their riding  mounts;  and none of 
them does not receive  a reward,  in case his real purpose  is to make superior  
Allah's  Word,  and not to get war booty,  the same  is true of the learned  men who  
are endued  with knowledge.  In this respect,  Allah  Almighty  says: "Allah  raises  to 
lofty ranks those who have faith from among  you and those endued  with  
knowledge."  He further  says: "They  are of different  ranks (in superiority)  in the 
Sight  of Allah."
The virtue  is relative,  in the sense  that our scorn  for the money  changers  when  
we compare  them with royalty  does not mean  that they are contemptible  when  
compared  with the street cleaners.  Think  not that whatever  falls short of the 
highest  rank is worthless.  For the highest  rank belongs  to the prophets,  followed  
by that of the saints,  then that of the learned  men who are well-established  in 
knowledge,  and the righteous  according  to their ranks.  In short  “whosoever  shall  
have wrought  an atom ’s weight  of good shall see it; and whosoever  shall have  
wrought  an atom ’s weight  of evil shall see it.” Whosoever  will seek  Allah  through  
knowledge,  no matter  what  kind,  he is sure to profit  and advance.
The tenth  duty:  one should  learn  the relation  of sciences  to the real purpose;  
perchance  he would  give preference  to the closest  one over the farthest,  to the 
most  important  over  anyone  else. The word  'important'  stands  for what  concerns  
you, and you should  be concerned  only with your affairs  in both the world  and 
the hereafter.  If you are unable  to join both the delights  and pleasures  of this 
world,  and the bliss of the hereafter,  as is attested  by the Holy Qur'an,  and 
confirmed  by intellects  and sights,  then,  you should  be more  concerned  with that 
which  will remain  forever.  At that level,  the world  will come  to be no more  than  
an abode,  the body  a riding  mount,  and the deeds  seeking  after the real purpose,  
and there  is no purpose  other  than to meet  Allah  Almighty  (in the hereafter),  in 
which  there  will be the never-ending  bliss and happiness,  even though  it is not103


Page 106:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
really  estimated  as it should  be in this world  but by a very few men.
The sciences,  in relation  to the happiness  and felicity  achieved  by the meeting  
of Allah Almighty  (in the hereafter)  and see His Bounteous  Honoured  
Countenance,  as sought  for and understood  by the Prophets,  which  neither  the 
laymen  nor the theologians  succeed  to understand,  are of three  ranks,  which  you 
might  understand  through  the following  example  by way of analogy:  The slave  
whose  freedom  and the right to hold property  are dependent  upon performing  
Hajj has been told that if he would  perform  Hajj he would  receive  both his 
freedom  and the right  to hold property;  but if he had made  his preparations  and 
actually  set out, then for some  unavoidable  reason  was detained  on the way, he 
would  receive  his freedom  only, thereby  escaping  the wretchedness  of slavery,  
but would  fail to enjoy  the right  to hold property.
To accomplish  all that he has to do three things:  First, the preparation  of the 
means of journey  by buying  a she-camel  and a water-skin,  and packing  the 
provisions  and fitting  out the mount.  Second,  he should  set out on journey  to the 
Ka'bah  and leave  behind  home  and kin. Third  he should  fulfill  the ceremonials  of 
Hajj one after the other.  Then after he had fulfilled  all obligations  and put off 
Ihram,  having  already  performed  the farewell  circumambulation  of the Ka'bah,  
he would  become  qualified  for freedom  and the right to hold property.  To every  
stage  in the journey  there  is a corresponding  rank: one for the preparation  for the 
journey,  another  for setting  out on journey  and crossing  desert,  and a third for 
performing  the duties  of Hajj. Thus he who has already  begun  to carry out the 
duties of Hajj is closer  to felicity  than he who is still engaged  in packing  the 
provisions  and fitting  out the mount  or he who has just embarked  on journey.
Similarly,  sciences  are also of three divisions:  one is similar  to preparing  the 
orovisions  and riding  mount,  and buying  the she-camel;  and this applies  to the 
sciences  of medicine  and jurisprudence,  and both are concerned  with the affairs  
of the body  in the world  and the hereafter.  Another  division  is similar  to setting  
out on journey  and crossing  the desert  and going  through  the obstacles  of the 
way (to the House);  and this applies  to purifying  the inward  from the wicked  
impure  traits; and to intrude  those huge obstacles  which  the earlier  and latter  
generations,  barring  a very few ones,  endued  with success,  fail to approach  is to 
follow  the way.
Acquiring  the knowledge  of it is similar  to acquiring  the knowledge  of the 
directions  of the different  desert  routes  and the encampments  along  the way.  
And just as the knowledge  of the location  of these encampments  and 
acquaintance  with the desert  routes  are of no benefit  without  actually  crossing  
them,  so is the science  of ethics  of no benefit  without  practice.  Yet practice  
without  knowledge  is not possible.  A third is similar to Hajj and its 
obligations;  and it is the science  of knowing  Allah,  His attributes,  angels,  and 
works  as well as what we have mentioned  in the survey  of the science  of 
Revelation.  In it is salvation  and attainment  of happiness.  Salvation  will be the 
lot of any follower  of the way on the condition  that his real purpose  should  be 
the true goal which  is safety.104


Page 107:
Book  One:  Knowledge
The attainment  of happiness  is not achieved  except  by the Gnostics  who  
know  Allah  and are close to Him,  who are given  to enjoy  in His neighbourhood  
happiness,  bounty  and a garden  of bliss. But as for those who fall short of 
perfection,  only salvation  and peace  are their lot. This is in accordance  with the 
words  of Allah  Almighty:  " Thus,  then,  if he be of those  Nearest  to Allah,  (There  
is for him) Rest and Satisfaction,  and a Garden  of Delights.  And if he be of the 
Companions  of the Right  Hand,  (For him is the salutation),  "Peace  be unto you"  
from  the Companions  of the Right  Hand."
Anyone  who does not follow  the way which  leads to Allah  nor set out on 
(journey),  or anyone  who does set out, not in obedience  or devotion,  but for 
expedience,  belongs  to those of the left (hand)  who have gone astray,  and 
“For him is Entertainment  with Boiling  Water,  And burning  in Hell-Fire."  
(Al-Waqi'ah  88:91)
1 <j+ oM'C:  13?© c-^?-3 o^3 Gp 0? 0^oj i-* 1^ ^
i © 0*1 1 * Crf ^ ©
It should  be known  that this, in the sight of the learned  men who are well-  
versed  in the science  of religion,  is the “certain  truth ” a truth which  they have  
perceived  inwardly  through  contemplation.  This contemplation  is more real and 
clearer  than seeing  with the eye. In it they rise above  the stage of imitation  just 
because  of hearing.  Their state is similar  to that of him, who hears and makes  
belief (of what he hears), and then he contemplates  therewith  his trust is 
confirmed,  unlike  the state of others,  who accept  the truth only by having  trust  
and faith (in what they hear),  without  having  the privilege  of contemplation  or 
seeing  with their  own eyes.
Happiness  lies behind  the science  of Reveladon  which  in turn lies behind  the 
science  of practical  religion,  which is to follow the way to the hereafter.  
Overcoming  the frailties  of human  characteristics  as well as eliminating  its 
blameworthy  elements  lie behind the science  of human  characteristics.  The  
science  of therapeutics  and its administration  lie behind  the science  of hygiene.  
The promotion  of the conditions  of health  and hygiene  by unity,  mutual  help and 
co-operation  through  which  clothing,  as well as food and lodging  are secured,  is 
entrusted  to the magistrates,  and its principles  for conducting  human  affairs  
within  the framework  of justice  and policy  are in the domain  of the jurisprudent,  
whereas  the science  which  deals  with the conditions  of health  is in the domain  of 
the physician.  When  one says that there  are two sciences:  the science  which  deals  
with the body (i.e. medicine),  and that which  deals  with the religion,  in reference  
to jurisprudence,  he intends  those common  exoteric  sciences  and not those  
specialized  esoteric  sciences.
But, if you say: "Why have you likened the science of medicine  and 
jurisprudence  to preparing  the provisions  and fitting  out the riding  mount?"
It should be known to you that what seeks after the nearness  (and  
neighbourhood)  of Allah  is the heart  and not the body.  Of course  I do not mean105


Page 108:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
by heart  this piece  of flesh (within  the chest).  It is one of Allah's  Mysteries  which  
is beyond  the perception  of senses,  and one of His Niceties  which  He sometimes  
designates  with the spirit,  and at other  times  with the well-satisfied  soul. But the 
religion  gives it the name  
and with which  all the body  becomes  a mount  and an instrument  for that nicety.
To uncover  this mystery  is a part of the science  of Revelation.  It is not 
available  (to anyone),  and there  is no concession  to mention  it; and the best to 
be mentioned  pertaining  to it is to say that it is a precious  jewel  and a valuable  
and treasured  pearl,  more  honourable  than those  visible  bodies.  It is a Divine  
command  in accordance  with Allah's  Statement:  "They  ask you concerning  the 
Spirit  (of inspiration).  Say: "The Spirit (comes)  by command  of my Lord: of 
knowledge  it is only a little that is communicated  to you, (O men!)""  (Al-Isra'106
of heart because  it is the first mount  of that mystery,
85)
f * i € * ** *4 (Js ^3 Jj J*1 Cr? C$ ^ ^ \
Although  all the creatures  are ascribed  to Allah  Almighty,  its ascription  to Him  
is more honourable  to that of all the body's organs,  even though  all of the 
creation  and command  belong  to Allah Almighty,  of a surety,  the command  is 
superior  to the creation.
This precious  jewel is the carrier  of Allah's  Trust,  by virtue of which  it is 
loftier  in rank than the heavens,  the earths  and the mountains,  which  rejected  to 
carry  that trust,  and were  afraid  of receiving  it, because  of the world  of dominion.  
But, let none  understand  from that that we refer  to the sempiternity  of spirits,  for 
him who adopts  that opinion  is an ignorant,  and a victim  of deceit,  who does not 
know  what  he is saying.  So, let's hold back  the rein of exposition  of that art, since  
it is beyond  the topic  in issue.  The real purpose  here is that it is this nicety  which  
seeks after the nearness  of the Lord, as it is by His Command,  from Whom  it 
stems,  and to Whom  it refers.  As for the body,  it is the vehicle  which  it rides,  
therewith  to seek after (its objectives).  The body on the way to Allah Almighty  
plays the same role for it as a she-camel  plays for the bodies  (of people)  on the 
way to perform  Hajj, or as the water-skin  in which  water  is stored,  for which  the 
human  body  is in need.
In this way, every  science,  whose  purpose  is the interest  of the human  body  
contributes  in serving  the interest  of the vehicle  of the spiritual  substance;  and it 
is not hidden  that the same  applies  to medicine.  Man is in need for it to maintain  
his health,  and had he been living  alone,  he would  also have been in need for it; 
and there remains  a difference  between  it and jurisprudence  in the sense  that had 
man lived alone (in this world),  he might  have dispensed  with it. But man has 
been created  in such a way that it is impossible  for him to live alone (in this 
world),  since  he could  not independently  secure  his livelihood  by doing  all works  
of sowing,  cultivating,  baking  and cooking,  or his clothes  or lodging  by making  all 
the equipment  necessary  for that,  which  forced  him to mix with and seek the help  
of others.
But no matter  how much people  mix with one another  their ambitions  are


Page 109:
Book  One:  Knowledge  
aroused  which  result  in their competition  to satisfy  their desires,  and contend  and 
struggle  to fulfill them. Their struggle  results  in their destruction  because  of the 
external  disharmony  in the body government  just as it results from internal  
disturbances  in their physical  bodies  whenever  there  is conflict  between  the humors.  
Through  medicine  the harmony  between  the conflicting  humors  within  the body  is 
maintained  and through  politics  and justice the harmony  between  the opposing  
elements  in the body  government  is preserved.  The science  of maintaining  harmony  
between  the humors  is medicine,  and the science  of preserving  harmony  among  men  
in their  affairs  and transactions  is jurisprudence.
Both of these sciences,  whether  medicine  or jurisprudence,  are for the 
preservation  of the body  which  is the vehicle  of the spirit,  unless  he who devotes  
himself  to the study  of either  medicine  or jurisprudence,  mortifies  his body and 
reforms  his heart,  he will be like the person  who purchases  the she-camel  and its 
fodder  and the water-skin  (in preparation  for Hajj) but never  does set out. And  
he who spends  his life over the niceties  of words  which  occur  in the course  of the 
debates  of jurisprudence  is like him who spends  his life tracing  the minute  fibres  
of the strings  with which  the water-skin  carried  by the pilgrim  is sewn together.  
The relation  of the former,  from amongst  the followers  of the way to reforming  
the heart  which  leads to the science  of Revelation  is like the relation  of the latter  
to those who go forward  along the pilgrimage  route or those who perform  its 
obligations.
Consider  these things and then accept  this free advice  from one who has 
accomplished  these things  but only achieved  them after a great struggle  and a 
brave effort  to break  away from the established  tradition  of men, the common  
folk and the elite,  i.e. tradition  is based  on ambition  and lust. This is sufficient  for 
the discussion  of the different  duties  of the learner.107
The Exposition  Of The Duties  Of The Guide  Teacher
It should  be known  that man in relation  to his knowledge  has four states,  like 
those  of the owner  of wealth:  in the first state, the owner  of wealth  gains money  
which  makes  him in the state of earning;  in the second  state, he saves what he 
earns,  therewith  he becomes  independent  of begging;  and in the third state, he 
spends  upon himself,  therewith  he benefits  (from  his earnings);  and the fourth  
state he spends  upon  others,  therewith  he becomes  generous  and bounteous,  and 
of a surety,  this is the most  honourable  and the noblest  of his states.  Knowledge  
is also acquired  in the same  way as wealth  is: in the first state it is sought  after  and 
gathered.  In the second  it is acquired,  therewith  one becomes  independent  of 
asking  others.  The third state corresponds  to study  and meditation  in which  one 
contemplates  and enjoys  and gets benefit  of what  has been acquired.  The fourth  
state corresponds  to teaching  and instructing  others  in it; and it is the noblest  of 
all the states.
For this reason,  he, who learns,  acts upon what he learns,  and teaches  it to 
others  is called  a great one in the dominion  of the heavens,  for he looks  like the
though  it is lighting  in itself,  or like sun which  lights  up for the other  things,  even


Page 110:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
the musk  which  spreads  its scent  upon  others,  as well as it is pleasant  in itself.  But 
he, who learns  and does not act upon  what  he learns,  is like a notebook,  which  
benefits  the others  (with  what  its pages  contain),  even though  it is unintelligent,  
or like the whetstone,  which,  itself  being  blunt, sharpens  the razor, or like the 
needle,  which  while  it remains  naked,  serves  in making  clothing  for others,  or like 
the wick  of a lamp  which  burns  itself  out in giving  light for others  according  
poetic  verse:  “A glowing  wick  is he Who  gives  his light and dies. ” Whoever  takes  
teaching  as a profession  takes upon himself  a great mission  and a grave  
responsibility.  Let him then observe  its etiquette  and fulfill  its duties,  which  go as 
follows:
The first duty:  he should  show  petty for the learners,  and deals  with them  in 
the same  way as he deals with his children,  in compliance  with the statement  of 
the Messenger  of Allah  (according  to the narration  of Abu Dawud,  An-Nasa'i  and 
Ibn Majah  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah):  "I'm to you in the same  position  as 
a father  to his children."  His goal is to deliver  them from  the fire of the hereafter,  
and this mission  is more  important  than the parents'  rescuing  their child from  the 
fire of this world.  For this reason,  the right of a teacher  (upon his pupil) has 
come  to be more  significant  and much  greater  than the right  of the parents  (upon  
their child).  Of a surety,  a parent  is the cause  of his (his child's)  current  existence  
in this mortal  life (of this world),  whereas  a teacher  is the cause  which  leads him 
to the never-ending  everlasting  life (of the hereafter).
But for the teacher,  what  is brought  into existence  through  the parent  would  
inevitably  be driven  to permanent  destruction.  It is the teacher  which  is of great  
benefit  as far as the never-ending  hereafter  life is concerned.  I mean here the 
teacher  of the sciences  of the hereafter,  or the teacher  of the sciences  of this 
world,  for the purpose  of attaining  felicity  in the hereafter,  and not of getting  
success  in this world.  But teaching  with the sole intention  to get success  in this 
world  leads to the destruction  of both the teacher  and the learner,  from  which  we 
seek refuge  with  Allah  Almighty.
As well as the right  of the children  who belong  to one father  is to lead a life of 
mutual  love and co-operation  in all purposes  and fields, so is the right of the 
pupils  of one teacher,  to love and have kind affection  towards  one another;  and 
this will not be achieved  unless  their final goal is to attain the felicity  of the 
hereafter;  and if their  goal is only to get success  in this world,  their portion  will be 
mutual  hatred,  resentment  and envy. Both learned  men of knowledge  and those  
of the hereafter  are on their journey  to Allah Almighty,  to Whom  they are 
following  the way which  starts  from  this world,  whose  years,  months  and days act 
as stations  for the road. Therefore,  companionship  which prevails  among  the 
travellers  to the different  regions  and towns  is a direct  cause  of their mutual  love  
and kind affection:  what about the journey  to the highest  Paradise,  and the 
related  companionship  which  should  prevail  among  the travelers  to it?
Since there is no restriction  or limitation  in the way to the happiness  of the 
hereafter,  no dispute  breaks  up among  these of he hereafter;  and since there is 
limitation  in the pleasures  and delights  of this world,  narrowness  is the lot of the108
to a


Page 111:
Book  One:  Knowledge109
way to it, which  results  from the crowd  of competition  and struggle.  Those  who  
seek to attain  position  of authority  through  knowledge  are not included  in those  
whom  Allah  meant  when  He said: "Verily,  the faithful  believers  
each other)."  (Al-Hujurat  10)
4 ® Opy  ’JP  'P ijijlj Pi'P 1 OW \PP u oPpj ’i uSj
But they are implied  in those,  whom  He Almighty  meant  when He said:  
"Friends  on that Day will be foes, one to another,  except  the Righteous."  
(Az-Zukhruf  67)are brothers  (to
4 © pp&p Ppq  pp  py.  r^Vt  >
The second  duty:  the teacher  should  follow  the steps of the legislator  "Peace  
be upon him":  he should  not ask for reward  for his teaching,  nor should  he aim 
at receiving  charge  or thanks  for his instruction.  On the contrary,  he should  teach  
just for the Countenance  of Allah Almighty,  and seeking  after His Nearness,  
seeing  they are not under  any obligation  to him, even though  their feeling  of 
obligation  to him is incumbent  upon  them.  But he should  rather  see their favour,  
when  they have educated  their hearts  to come  much  closer  to Allah  Almighty,  by 
planting  sciences  in them,  in the same way as the one who lends you a piece of 
land in order  to cultivate  it by yourself:  of a surety,  the benefit  you will get from  it 
is greater  than that of its owner.  How then should  you feel he is under any 
obligation  to you, seeing  that the reward  you will receive  for your teaching  is 
much  greater  than that of the learner  in the Sight  of Allah  Almighty?
Had it not been for the learner,  you (as a teacher)  would  not have attained  this 
reward.  So, ask not for any reward  in return  for your teaching  but from Allah  
Almighty,  in compliance  to Allah's  statement:  "And O my People!  I ask you for 
no wealth  in return:  my reward  is from  none  but Allah."  (Hud  29)
ipL p ip;  oyft  ip P P JP oj ^ P r^*^ 1 >
4 0 P'J  Pj
Therefore,  the wealth  and all that the world  contains  serve the body,  and the 
body  is the vehicle  and riding  mount  of the soul. Thus  what  should  be served  is 
knowledge,  therewith  the honour  of the soul is achieved,  so, he, who seeks  after  
wealth  through  knowledge,  is like him, who sweeps  the lower  part of his sandals  
with his face in order  to clean  it, reducing  thereby  the master  into a servant,  and 
giving  the servant  the position  of a master.  This is what is meant  by falling  
headlong  and is exactly  like the fate of the criminals  on the Day of Judgment  
when they “shall droop  their heads  before  their Lord. ” In short,  to the teacher  
belong  both favour  and the credit.  See then how the affairs  of religion  have fallen  
into the hands of men who claim that their sole intention,  in pursuing  the 
sciences  of jurisprudence  and theology  and in teaching  both and other  sciences  
besides,  is to come much closer to the Presence  of Allah Almighty,  yet they  
sacrifice  their wealth  and rank, and suffer  great humiliations  in the service  of


Page 112:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
rulers in order to gain their favours.  Were these men to turn away from such  
practices  they  would  be ignored  and no one would  turn to them  for advice.
Therefore,  the teacher  expects  the student  to follow  him in everything,  and to 
back his supporters,  fight his adversaries,  rise publicly  to perform  his demands,  
and to fulfill for him all his needs. If the student  fails to achieve  all these  
expectations  the teacher  will turn against  him and become  one of his most  
virulent  enemies.  How despicable  is the learned  man who is not only content  
with such a position  but is also proud  of it, and does not feel shy to say that his 
aim in taking  up teaching  is to spread  knowledge  for the sake of coming  much  
closer  to the Presence  of Allah  Almighty  and for defending  His religion!  But you 
have only to look at the indicative  portents  in order  to see the hypocrisy  and the 
deception  of it all.
The third duty: the teacher  should  be persistent  in giving  advice to the 
learner  as much  as is available  to him: he should  prevent  him from attending  the 
work  of higher  grade  before  he deserves  it, as well as from being  engaged  in an 
esoteric  science  before  finishing  from that which  is exoteric.  He should  draw  his 
attention  to the fact that the real purpose  of seeking  after knowledge  is just to 
come  much  closer  to the Presence  of Allah  Almighty,  and not to attain  power,  or 
vie in glory (with his fellows),  or compete  (his adversaries),  defacing  that in his 
sight  as much  as possible.
However,  what a wicked  learned  man corrupts  is more than what he might  
mend.  If he comes  to know,  from (what  appears  to him from)  his inward  that he 
seeks  after  knowledge  only for the sake of this world,  let him consider  the kind of 
knowledge  he seeks  after: if it is the science  of disputations  of jurisprudence  and 
argumentations  of theology,  and giving  religious  verdicts  in legal disputes,  he 
should  prevent  him from  acquiring  them,  for those  sciences  do not belong  to the 
knowledge  of (the way to) the hereafter,  nor are they included  in those in 
connection  with which  it was said: "We made an attempt  to acquire  knowledge  
but not for the sake of Allah  Almighty,  but knowledge  persisted  in being  for the 
Sake  of Allah  Almighty."
This applies  to the sciences  of interpretation  (of the Qur'an)  and Hadith,  and 
the science  of the hereafter,  and the acquaintance  of the soul's morality  and the 
way of educating  it, which  occupied  the early  people.  If a student  learns  it just for 
the sake of this world,  there  will be no harm  to be let alone  because,  although  he 
has devoted  himself  to them in the hope of becoming  a preacher  and gaining  
followers,  he would,  in the course  or at the end of his work,  wake up to the fact 
that in them lie those sciences  which  are contributing  to the fear of Allah and 
which  regard  as slight the world  and glorify  the hereafter.  This may finally  lead 
the student  to the right path and he would  then observe  what he preaches  to 
others.  The desire  to be popular  and influential  are to man like the grains  which  
are scattered  around  the trap in order to ensnare  the birds.  The same has been  
done by Allah Almighty  in connection  with man: He created  sexual  desire in 
order to preserve  procreation  and the survival  of the race. He also created110


Page 113:
Book  One:  Knowledge
ambition  as a means  for perpetuating  knowledge,  a thing  highly  desirable  in these  
sciences.
But to devote  one’s life to sheer controversies,  theological  argumentations,  
and unusual  details  while  ignoring  other studies  promotes,  in all except  those  to 
whom  Allah has shown  mercy  or those who have taken up other religious  
sciences  as well, nothing  but hardening  in the heart, negligence  toward  Allah,  
excess  in iniquity,  and overindulgence  in striving  for power.  There  is no better  
proof for this than personal  experience  and observation.  Look, learn, and 
consider  so that you might  witness  the realization  of this fact by men all over the 
world.  Truly  Allah  is the source  of our help.
It is narrated  that Sufyan  Ath-Thawri  was once seen in a state of sadness  
thereupon  he was asked:  "Why  are you sad?" he replied:  “We have become  traffic  
for the children  of this world.  One after another  would  attach  himself  to us until  
he has acquired  a portion  of knowledge,  he would  be appointed  a judge,  or a 
governor,  or a mayor  of a certain  place. ”
The fourth  duty: and it is one of the subde points of the profession  of 
teaching.  It is that the teacher  should  dissuade  the student  from his evil conduct  
by way of aLlusion  rather  than by way of direct utterance  and with clemency  
rather  than with horrible  scolding.  Open  dissuasion  tears the veil of awe, gives  
rise to defiance,  and encourages  obstinacy  in accordance  with the statement  of 
The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him",  the guide  of every  teacher,  when  
he said: “Had men been forbidden  to make  porridge  of camels ’ dung,  they would  
have done it, saying  'we have not been forbidden  to do it but because  there is 
some  good in it'.” This is shown  clearly  in the story of Adam  and Eve and the 
prohibition  imposed  upon them. This story has not been narrated  to you as a 
night conversation  but as an example  and a reminder.  Moreover,  such allusions  
and suggestions  invite  men of noble  souls  and shrewd  minds  who incline  to elicit  
their significance,  and the pleasure  of grasping  their meaning  results  in a greater  
desire  on the part of man for learning  in order  to show  that such things  are not beyond  
the capacity  of his mind.
The fifth duty: such of teachers  as undertakes  a certain  science  should  not 
disgrace  in the sight of the learner  the other sciences  which is beyond  his 
teaching,  like the teacher  of linguistics,  whose  habit  is to disrepute  the science  of 
jurisprudence,  as well as the habit  of the teacher  of jurisprudence  to disregard  the 
science of interpretation  and Hadith on the basis that it depends  upon  
transmission  and hearing  of narrations,  and this is the state of the old men, and 
there  is no role for the mind  to play in considering  it. The same  is also true of the 
teacher  of theology,  who is in the habit of disparaging  the science of 
jurisprudence,  on the basis that it is no more  than hair-splitting  controversies  and 
speech  about menstruation,  which could by no means  be compared  with the 
speech  about  the attributes  of (Allah)  Most  Gracious.
Those  are blameworthy  traits of the teacher,  which  should  be avoided.  On the 
contrary,  he who undertakes  the teaching  of one science  should  make easy the 
way for the learner  to study other sciences.  Moreover,  if he undertakes  the111


Page 114:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
teaching  of many  sciences,  he should  observe  the gradual  progression  to promote  
the student  from  one grade  to another.
The sixth  duty: the teacher  should  limit his teaching  to what complies  with  
the learner ’s understanding:  he should  not give him anything  that is beyond  the 
reach of his mind with the result that he might cause him to refrain from  
learning,  or perplex  him, and put him to confusion.  In so doing,  he copies  the 
guidance  of the master  of all the human  beings,  the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be 
him" when he said (: "We, the assembly  of Prophets,  have been  
commanded  to deal with the people  in accordance  with their different  positions,  
and speak  with them  in such  a way as to conform  to their  minds."
For this reason,  he should  confide  to him the truth only when  he knows  
that he is capable  of understanding  it independently.  In this connection,  the 
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" further  said: "No one tells a 
people  of a speech  which  is beyond  the reach  of their minds  but that it will 
be a cause  of trial to many  of them."  Ali "Allah  be pleased  with him" said,  
while beckoning  to his breast:  "Here  (within  this breast  of mine) there are 
much  knowledge  (which  would  have been disclosed)  had there been carriers  
fitting  for transmitting  them."  He "Allah  be pleased  with him" has told the 
truth:  of a surety,  the hearts  of the righteous  and pious  persons  act as vaults  
for Divine  mysteries.
The teacher  therefore  should  not reveal  all that he knows  to everyone,  in case  
the learner  has the capability  of understanding  it, even though  he is not fitting  to 
get benefit  form it: what then about that which is beyond  the reach of the 
learner ’s mind?  Jesus "Peace  be upon him" said: "Hang  not the jewels  in the 
necks  of pigs!"  of a surety,  wisdom  is much  better  than jewels,  and whoever  hates  
it is worse  than pigs. For this reason,  it has been said: "Measure  (your  treatment  
with) any slave in accordance  with the scale of his mind, and weigh for him 
according  to the balance  of his mind  until you become  safe from his evil, and he 
gets benefit  from you" otherwise,  you effort  will become  ineffective  because  of 
the disparity  of measures  of minds.
It is narrated  that a learned  man was asked  about  something,  to which  he gave  
no answer.  On that the asker said: Have you not heard the statement  of the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" (according  to the 
narration  of Ibn Majah  on the authority  of Abu Sa'id): "He, who conceals  a 
portion  of beneficial  knowledge  will come  on the Day of Judgement,  reined  with  
a rein of fire"?  he said to him: Then,  leave the rein and go away;  and if he who  
has the faculty  of understanding  comes  to me, from  whom  I conceal  knowledge,  
let him then rein me. Indeed,  Allah Almighty  says: "Give  not the weak-minded  
your property",  paying  thereby  the attention  to the fact that it is much  better  to 
preserve  knowledge  and conceal  it from him who distorts  and damages  it. To be 
sure, it is more  unfair  to give knowledge  to him who is not worthy  of receiving  it 
than to conceal  it from  him who is fitting  for it.
(Consider  the following  poetic  verses  in explanation  of that concept):  "Shall  
pearls be given to herders  of the sheep,  Shall wealth  be trusted  to their rustic112
upon


Page 115:
Book  One:  Knowledge
keep?  They  would  not comprehend  nor know  its worth,  To give them  would  be 
adorning  beasts.  But Allah  is kind if by His grace He sends One worthy  of my 
knowledge,  of my wit, To him my goods  I’ll give and gain his love; Until such  
time I will withhold  my gifts — One ’s learning  would  be wasted  upon fools;  And  
he does sin who from the worthy  keeps."
The seventh  duty: the learner  of limited  understanding  should  not be taught  
but such of sciences  as are clear in such a way as to conform  to his restricted  
mind,  and no mention  should  be made to him of such of detail as are apt to 
follow  but which  he deems  fitting  for the present  to withhold.  Of a surety,  this 
might  weaken  his desire  for acquiring  such of knowledge  as is clear, perplex  his 
mind  and understanding,  and give him the false impression  that it is the teacher's  
niggardliness  and illiberality  which lie behind  withholding  those subtle details  
from him. That's  because  everyone  thinks  he is fitting  for every  subtle  and fine 
science.  There  is none  but that he is well-satisfied  with Allah  Almighty  for giving  
him perfect  mind;  but even, the most foolish  and the most  weak-minded  among  
them  is the most  cheerful  of the perfection  of his mind.
From  this point  of view,  it should  be known  that it is not fitting  to confuse  
the belief  of a layman,  who abides  by law, and in whose  heart  the articles  of faith  
transmitted  from the ancestors  have been  well-established,  with neither  pervasive  
equivocation  nor elusive  interpretation,  and whose  inward  is good,  but his mind  
has no capacity  to understand  anything  beyond  that. On the contrary  he should  
be let alone  with his profession,  because  if he were confronted  with the esoteric  
interpretations  of externals  he would  give up his position  as a layman  without  
attaining  the status  of an educated  man.
Then the obstacles  which  have hitherto  deterred  him from evil will crumble  
and he will be transformed  into a rebellious  devil who will destroy  both himself  
and others.  In reality,  laymen  should  not be disturbed  with discussion  on the 
realities  which  underlie  subtle  and fine sciences  but rather  should  be restricted  to 
instruction  in the acts of worship  and honesty  in undertaking  their respective  
professions.  Their  hearts  should  be filled with yearning  for the Garden  and fear 
of the fire (of Hell) as the Qur ’an has ordained.  They should  not be confused  
with questionable  ideas for fear that such suspicious  ideas strike root in their  
hearts  with the result  that it becomes  difficult  for them to free themselves  from  
such doubts  and fall victims  to misery  and destruction.  In short, the door of 
controversy  and discussion  should  not be opened  to the laymen  because  it will 
hinder  them from practicing  their professions  on which  the welfare  of the world  
as well as the continued  living  of the elite depends.
The eighth  duty: the teacher  should  act upon his knowledge  in such a way 
that his deeds should  not give lie to his words.  The knowledge  is perceived  by 
minds,  whereas  deed is by sights;  and since those who see with their eyes are 
greater  in number,  whoever  has his deeds  contradict  his words  will be detained  
from the right guidance.  If one has anything,  and asks the people  not to have it 
on the basis that it is a deadly  poison,  he will become  an object  of people's  
ridicule  and lays himself  open to their accusation,  who in turn will become  more  
eager to get what they have been forbidden,  saying: Had it not been the most113


Page 116:
The quarter  of the acts of worship114
pleasant  and the most  delicious,  he would  not have favoured  himself  with it apart  
from  us."
The example  of a guide  teacher  in relation  to those  who seek guidance  is like 
the example  of the stamp  in relation  to the clay, or the shade  of a cane in relation  
stick: how should  the clay be stamped  with a stamp  which  has no form? to a
Moreover,  how should  the shade  of a cane be straight  since the stick is crooked?  
In confirmation  to that concept,  it is said in the form of a poetic  verse:  "Forbid  
not the people  to do a thing,  the like of which  you do yourself:  how shameful  it 
will be if you do that!" Allah Almighty  says: "Do you enjoin  good upon the 
people  and forget  yourselves?"  (Al-Baqarah  44)
For the same  reason,  the sin of a learned  man is more  grievous  than that of an 
ignorant,  for with his slip; a lot of people  are misled  in imitation  of his conduct.  
To be sure, "he, who lays the foundation  of an evil way will bear  its sin, as well as 
the sins of those  who act upon it." Ali "Allah  be pleased  with him" said in this 
respect:  “Two men have  broken  my back (with  the heavy  burden  of their sins): a 
dissolute  learned  man and an ascetical  ignorant  one. The ignorant  man deceives  
men through  his asceticism  and the learned  one deceives  them through  his 
debauchery. ”
CHAPTER  SIX: ON THE DEFECTS  OF KNOWLEDGE;  AND EXPOSITION  OF 
THE DISTINCTIVE  FEATURES  OF THE LEARNED  MEN OF THE
HEREAFTER;  AND  THE LEARNED  MEN OF FALSEHOOD
We've  mentioned  earlier  the good merits  of knowledge  and the learned  men;  
and there are grievous  warnings  against  the learned  men of falsehood,  which  
indicate  that they will receive  the most severe punishment  on the Day of 
Judgement  So, it is a great  mission  to know  the certain  features  which  distinguish  
the learned  men of the world from those of the hereafter.  We mean by the 
learned  men of this world those of falsehood,  whose  purpose  from acquiring  
knowledge  is to enjoy the pleasures  and delights  of this world,  and through  it 
attain  prestige  and high position  in the sight  of its inhabitants.
In this context,  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" said: "The one who will receive  the most grievous  punishment  among  the 
people  on the Day of Judgement  is a learned  man, whom  Allah  AJmighty  does  
not benefit  with his knowledge."  According  to another  narration  (by Ibn Hibban  
and Al-Baihaqi  ending  up with Abu Ad-Darda',  and tracing  it not to) the 
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  him" said: "One  will not become  a learned  
man until he acts upon  his knowledge."  According  to another  narration  (by At- 
Tirmidhi  on the authority  of Al-Hassan  from Jabir) the Messenger  of Allah  
"Peace  be upon him" said: "The knowledge  is to two kinds: one which is 
expressed  by tongue  (in the form of speech,  i.e. the exoteric  science)  and this is 
the proof  of Allah  against  His creatures;  and another  which  lies in the heart (i.e. 
the esoteric  science)  and this is the beneficial  knowledge."


Page 117:
Book  One:  Knowledge
The Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" further  said (in the narration  of 
Al-Hakim  on the authority  of Anas):  "Towards  the end of the time, there will be 
ignorant  worshippers  and wicked  learned  men."  According  to another  narration  
(by Ibn Majah  on the authority  of Jabir)  the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  
him" said: "Do not learn knowledge  with the intention  to vie in glory  with the 
learned  men, or debate  therewith  the feeble-minded  among  the people,  or even  
to divert  through  it the attention  of the people  to you: he, who does this will be 
in the fire (of Hell)."  According  to another  narration  the Messenger  of Allah  
"Peace  be upon him" said: "He, who conceals  a pordon  of knowledge  which  he 
has, Allah  Almighty  will rein him with a rein of fire (on the Day of  Judgement)."
According  to another  narration  (by Ahmad  on the authority  of Abu Dharr)  
the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "I am not afraid  of the evil of 
anyone  else other  than the Dajjal  for you more  than I'm of the Dajjal  himself."  It 
was said to him: "Who  are those?"  he said: "The misleading  rulers  and imams."  
According  to another  narration  (by Ad-Dailami  on the authority  of Al-Hassan  
without  tracing  it up to) the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "He,  
who advances  in knowledge,  even though  not in guidance,  he becomes  much  
farther  from  Allah  Almighty."  Jesus  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "Until  which  time  
will you keep guiding  walkers  at night  to the right  way while  you are still sitting  in 
the company  of the confused  ones?"
Those  and other  narrations  besides  indicate  how dangerous  is the knowledge,  
and how a learned  man is vulnerable  either  to the everlasting  destruction  or the 
never-ending  happiness,  who, by his pursuit  of knowledge,  endangers  himself  to 
lose safety,  unless  he attains  happiness  and felicity.
There  are also a lot of traditions  in this connection.  It is narrated  that Umar  
"Allah  be pleased  with him" said: "The thing which  I fear most for you is a 
hypocrite  omniscient."  They asked: "How should one be a hypocrite  
omniscient?"  he said: "When  one is knowledgeable  of what is expressed  by 
tongue,  even though  ignorant  of what lies in the heart and how he should  act 
upon his knowledge."  Al-Hassan  "Allah's  mercy  be upon him" said: "Be not of 
those  who join the knowledge  of the learned  men and the proverbs  of sages,  even  
though  in their conduct  they are like the feeble-minded  persons."  A man said to 
Abu Hurairah  "Allah  be pleased  with him":  "I would  like to learn  knowledge,  but 
I'm afraid  I might  waste  it." He said: "Sufficient  for the loss of knowledge  is to 
leave  it."
It was said to Ibrahim  Ibn Uyainah:  "Who  among  the people  is ready to 
show  regret  for the longest  time?"  he said: "In this world,  it is the one, who  
does a favour  to somebody  who does not give thanks  for it; and at the 
moment  of death,  it is a learned  man who has indulged  in his knowledge."  
According  to Al-Khalil  Ibn Ahmad:  "There  are four types  of men: a man who  
knows,  and he is well-aware  of his knowledge,  and this is a learned  man whom  
you should  follow;  a man who knows,  even though  he is not aware  of the fact 
that he knows,  and this is heedless,  whom  you should  awaken;  a man who  
does not know  and he is well-aware  of his ignorance,  and this is a guidance-115


Page 118:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
seeker,  whom  you should  guide (to the right way); and a man who does not 
know,  and he is not aware  of the fact that the does not know,  and this is an 
ignorant,  whom  you should  reject."  According  to Sufyan  Ath-Thawri:  "It is 
the habit of knowledge  to invite the deed to respond  to its invitation,  
otherwise,  it will depart."
According  to Ibn Al-Mubarak:  "One remains  a learned  man as long as he 
keeps  seeking  after  knowledge,  and once  he thinks  he has become  a learned  man,  
he recedes  into ignorance."  Al-Fudail  Ibn Iyad "Might  Allah  bestow  mercy  upon  
him" said: "I have mercy  upon three types of men: a previously  chief  among  his 
people  who has been put to humiliation;  a wealthy  man among  his people  who  
has become  poor;  and a learned  man, who has become  a laughing  stock for the 
world."  According  to Al-Hassan:  "The punishment  of the learned  men is the 
death  of their  hearts,  and the death  of hearts  leads to seeking  after  this world  with  
the deed  of the hereafter."
It is said in a form  of two poetic  verses:  "I wonder  at him who buys error for 
guidance,  even though  he who buys his world  for his faith is more  amazing!  But 
he, who pays a high price to rob the delights  of others in this world is the 
strangest  of all!"
(It is narrated  on unknown  authority  that) the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be 
upon him" said: "The learned  man (of falsehood)  will receive  punishment  so 
much  severe  that he will be made  to go all around  so that those  of the fire will see 
in order  to increase  his torment."  Of a surety,  he means  here the wicked  dissolute  
learned  man. It is unanimously  narrated  on the authority  of Usamah  Ibn Zaid  
that he heard  Allah's  Apostle  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" having  
said: “On the day of Judgement,  the learned  man will be brought  forward  and 
thrown  into the fire of Hell  whereas  his bowels  will gush out and he will be made  
to carry them  round  and go round  all over the Hell in the same  way as a donkey  
turns a mill-stone  round  and round.  Then  the people  of Hell will ask him about  
the reason  of his torture  and he will say: “I was wont  to enjoin  what  is right  upon  
others  but failed to do it myself,  and to forbid  what  is wrong  and committed  it 
myself."
Therefore,  the learned  man will receive  a double  punishment  because  he 
disobeys  Allah Almighty  in spite of his knowledge.  For this reason,  Allah  
Almighty  says: "Verily,  the hypocrites  will be in the lowest  bottom  of the fire 
(of Hell)."  (An-Nisa  145)116
That's  because  they rejected  faith after their knowledge  of it. Moreover,  the 
Jews have been made much worse than the Christians,  although  they have  
ascribed  no child to Allah Almighty,  nor have they made Him the third in a 
trinity,  but because  they rejected  faith (of the Messenger)  after their knowledge  
of his reality,  according  to the statement  of Allah  Almighty:  "They  know  him 
with certainty  in the same way as they know their real children."  (Al-Baqarah  
146; Al-An'am  20)


Page 119:
Book  One: Knowledge 117
He further  says: "When  there  came  to them  what  they really  know,  they rejected  
it: behold!  Allah's  Curse  be upon  the rejecters  of faith!"  (Al-Baqarah  89)
i © jp <5)1 Aliii ^ Iyjp fe ^;~C-  llii ^
He also says relating  the story of Bal'am  Ibn Ba'ura':  " Relate  to them the 
story  of the man to whom  We sent Our Signs,  but he passed  them  by: so Satan  
followed  him up, and he went astray.  If it had been Our Will, We should  have  
elevated  him with Our Signs;  but he inclined  to the earth,  and followed  his 
vain desires.  His similitude  is that of a dog: if you attack  him, he lolls out his 
tongue,  or if you leave him alone, he (still) lolls out his tongue.  That is the 
similitude  of those who reject Our Signs; so relate the story; perchance  they  
may reflect."  (Al-A'raf  175:176)
jJj (J2S CjIxjLaJ! Cr? 0^ 4-vJli  lliijlf  ajjoJU (iOJl iL ^
oj q--l I (Jj wife-1 .muSsJJ
^ © 0_J Hxj_.lL  fej jS^ yjj]'\y%sS\  ^jL» tiJJ'jj C^Jb
The same is true of the wicked  dissolute  learned  man. Although  Bal'am  was 
given  the Book  of Allah,  he betook  himself  to lusts and desires,  and this is the 
point  of his resemblance  with the dog, i.e. it is the same  whether  he was or was 
not given  wisdom,  he still lolls out his tongue  showing  his persistence  in lusts  
and desires.
Jesus "Peace  be upon him" said: "The example  of the learned  men of 
falsehood  is like the example  of a rock which  has fallen upon the mouth  of a 
river: it neither  drank  water,  nor did it let water  pass to the plants;  or like the 
example  of the pipes which  lead into the cesspool,  whose  outside  is gypsum  
white  and their  inside  is full of refuse  and filth; or like the example  of sepulchres  
the outside  of which  is polished  and clean and the inside  is full of dead bodies  
and bones. ”
These  Prophetic  traditions  and narrations  show that the learned  man of this 
world will occupy  a more inferior  position  and will receive  a more severe  
punishment  than the ignorant  person,  while those who will succeed  to attain  
felicity  and become  close to the Presence  of Allah  Almighty  are the learned  men  
of the hereafter,  who have many  distinctive  characteristics:
One of those  characteristics  is that such learned  man should  not seek the 
world  with his knowledge.  That's  because  the learned  
should  make sense to the insignificance,  inferiority,  filthy contamination  and 
departure  of this world,  in contrast  with the great  significance,  eternity,  pureness,  
and glory of the dominion  of the hereafter,  putting  in consideration  that both  
world  and hereafter  are opposing,  or like two fellow-wives:  the more  you please  
one of them,  the more  you cause  the other  to be angry,  or like both scales  of the 
balance:  the higher  one of them rises up, the lower  the other  falls, or like bothown
of the least degree man


Page 120:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 118
East and West:  the closer  you come  to one direction,  the farther  you go from  the 
other,  or like two vessels,  one of which  is full and the other  is empty:  the more  
from that which  is full into the other until it is filled, the lesser it you pour
remains  in the first until  it becomes  empty.
However,  he who makes  no sense to the insignificance,  inferiority,  and filth,  
whereas  its pleasures  and delights  are contaminated  with its pains and tortures,  
and the abrupt  end of what  becomes  pure of it, is, by all means,  a weak-minded,  
since  both observation  and experience  bring  about  a clear evidence  which  guides  
to this fact. How should one of no sound mind be of the learned  men?
Furthermore,  he, who make  no sense  to the great  significance  and permanence  of 
the hereafter,  is a disbeliever,  deprived  of faith:  how should  one who has no faith  
belong  to the learned  men? He, who makes  no sense to the fact that both the 
world  and the hereafter  are opposing,  and rather  to join them is an impossible  
desire,  is, by all means,  ignorant  of the laws of all the Prophets  and Messengers,  if 
not unbeliever  of the Holy Qur'an  as a whole,  from its beginning  to its ending:  
how should  such be numbered  among  the assembly  of the learned  men?  To be 
sure, he who is well-aware  of all that, and does not give preference  to the 
hereafter  over the world  is possessed  by devil: His lust has vanquished  him and 
his wickedness  has overpowered  him: how should  such be enumerated  among  
the party  of the learned  men?
According  to a narration  transmitted  from (the Prophet)  David,  he said 
relating  from  Allah  Almighty:  "O David!  The least punishment  I will give to a 
learned  man who gives preference  to desire  over my love is that I forbid  him 
the pleasure  and honour  of having  communion  with Me. O David!  Ask not 
about Me a learned  man, whom the joy of this world has intoxicated,  
perchance  he will keep you off My Love:  those  are the highway  brigands  who  
attack  My worshippers  to drive  them  away  from  My Path. O David!  If you see 
one who is seeking  after Me, be in his service!  O David!  He, who brings  back  
anyone  who has run away to My Presence,  I will enlist him among  the 
excellent  learned  men; and whomever  I enlist among  the excellent  learned  
men,  I will never  punish  him."
For this reason,  Al-Hassan  said: "The punishment  of the learned  men is the 
death  of their  hearts,  and the death  of hearts  leads to seeking  after this world  with  
the deed of the hereafter."  For the same reason,  Yahya  Ibn Mu'adh  said: "The  
brilliance  of knowledge  and wisdom  vanish  only when  the world  is sought  after  
through  them."  According  to Sa'id Ibn Al-Musayyab  "Might  Allah  bestow  mercy  
upon him" said: "When  you see a learned  men frequent  the gatherings  of the 
chiefs  and rulers,  you should  know  that he is a thief."  According  to Umar  "Allah  
be pleased  with him": "When  you see a learned  man having  a tendency  to the 
love of this world,  entrust  not your religion  to him, for he, who loves anything  
should,  inevitably  be engaged  in what  he loves."
It is narrated  that Malik  Ibn Dinar  said: I have read in some  books  belonging  
to the ancients  that Allah Almighty  says: "The least punishment  I give to a 
learned  man when  he loves this world  (and prefers  it to My Love)  is that I will


Page 121:
Book  One:  Knowledge
take the pleasure  and honour  of having  communion  with Me away from his 
heart."  According  to a certain  narration,  a man wrote to his brother:  "You've  
been given knowledge:  so, extinguish  not the light of your knowledge  with the 
darkness  of sins, and thus will remain  in the midst  of darkness  on a day, when  
those  of knowledge  will proceed  with the help of the light of their knowledge."  
Yahya  Ibn Mu'adh  Ar-Razi  used to say to the learned  men of this world:  “O 
people  of knowledge!  Your  palaces  are like those  of Caesar,  your homes  are like 
those  of Khosrau,  your doors  are like those  of Tahir  (in reference  to Tahir  Ibn 
Al-Hussain  Dhu-Al-Yaminayn  one of Al-Ma'mun's  ministers),  your  footwears  are 
like those of Goliath  (Jalut who was killed at the hands of the Prophet  David  
according  to the Qur'an),  your coaches  are like those  of Qarun,  your utensils  are 
like those  of Pharaoh,  your sins are the same as those  of the Pre-Islamic  days of 
ignorance,  and your  beliefs  are Satanic:  where  then is the Muhammadan  law?”
According  to a certain  poet: "The shepherd  keeps  the sheep  from the danger  
of wolves:  Who then would  keep them safe by day and night  seeing  that all the 
shepherds  are like wolves?"  according  to another:  "O you learned  men who are 
the flavour  of the town!  What  will recover  salt when  it looses  its flavour?"  It was 
said to a Gnostic:  “Do you not think that he to whom  disobedience  is well­
pleasing  does not know  Allah? ” He replied:  "I do not doubt  that he who prefers  
this world to the hereafter,  does not know Allah. ” This latter thing is by far 
worse.
Think  not that abandoning  wealth  is sufficient  for anyone  to join the company  
of the learned  men of the hereafter!  That's  because  majesty  is more  harmful  than  
wealth.  For this reason  Bishr  Ibn Al-Harith  related  that a certain  Bab once told 
him: “Whenever  you hear a man saying:  We were told/  what he really  means  is: 
‘Give room to me (to speak  and pay your attention  to me’.” This same Bishr  
buried  over ten baskets  full of books  used to say: “I have yearning  to relate  
traditions  but when  I lose this yearning  I will relate. ” He also, as well as others  
besides  him, said: "When  you feel you have yearning  for relating  traditions,  you 
should  keep silent, and when this yearning  vanishes,  you might relate."  That's  
because  taking  pleasure  from the majesty  of being  useful  and enjoying  the office  
of guiding  others  is much  greater  than any pleasure  else one might  take from  the 
delights  of this world;  and he, who responds  to his yearning  in this respect  
belongs  to these  of the world.
For this reason,  Ath-Thawri  said: "The temptation  of relating  tradition  is 
much  graver  than that produced  by one's family,  property,  and offspring.'  And  
how should  you not be afraid  of its temptation,  since  it was said to the chief  of all 
the Messengers  "Peace  be upon  him": "And had We not given  you strength  you 
would  nearly  have  inclined  to them  a little."  (Al-Isra  74)
i (@) \Zi JLjjJJ  m 0> >
According  to Sahl: "All knowledge  belongs  to this world,  and the hereafter's  
portion  of it is only that upon  which  one acts; and all deeds  are vain except  those  
done sincerely  (and in accordance  with the requirements  of law). He further119


Page 122:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
said: "All the people  die barring  the learned  men (whose  knowledge  survives);  
and all the learned  men are in the state of bewilderment  barring  those  who act 
upon their knowledge;  and all the workers  are arrogant  barring  the faithful  
sincere;  and every  faithful  sincere  remains  in awe until he knows  with which  work  
his deeds will be concluded  (in this world)."  According  to Abu Sulaiman  Ad- 
Darani:  "When  one seeks after tradition  (which are of no benefit  for the 
hereafter),  or gets married,  or sets out on journey  to get earnings,  he then has 
inclined  to the world."  Of a surety,  he refers  here to the pursuit  of the singular  
chains  of transmission,  or those  traditions  which  are of no use in seeking  for the 
hereafter.
Jesus  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "How  should  one be of those  of knowledge,  
who turns  his face to the way of his world,  even though  the hereafter  is the end 
of his journey?  How should one be of the learned  men, who pursues  the 
narrations  only to relate them other than to act upon them?"  Salih Ibn Kaisan  
said: "I've caught  up with the venerable  sheikhs  who used to seek refuge  with  
Allah Almighty  from (the evil of) the wicked  one who had knowledge  of the 
sunnah."  It is narrated  (by both Abu Dawud  and Ibn Majah)  on the authority  of 
Abu Hurairah  "Allah  be pleased  with him" that the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be 
upon him" said: "He, who pursues  a portion  of knowledge  therewith  the 
hereafter  is sought  for, just to get a worldly  benefit  will not detect  the smell  of the 
Garden  on the Day of  Judgement."
Allah  Almighty  describes  the learned  men of falsehood  as those  who devour  
the delights  of this world with their knowledge,  and the learned  men of the 
hereafter  as those  who are submissive  and ascetic.  He says about  the learned  men  
of this world:  "And remember  Allah took a Covenant  from the People  of the 
Book,  to make  it known  and clear to mankind,  and not to hide it; but they threw  
it away behind  their backs,  and purchased  with it some miserable  gain! and vile 
was the bargain  they made!"  (A1 Imran  187)
* 'j3 g-tliJ  J4 J \yj\ jjT <Jl!Lw4 4i)t I ilj ^
4 ©5 n ^ ^ ^
Concerning  the learned  men of the hereafter  He Almighty  says: " And there  
are, certainly,  among  the People  of the Book,  those  who believe  in Allah,  in the 
revelation  to you, and in the revelation  to them,  bowing  in humility  to Allah:  they  
will not sell the Signs  of Allah  for a miserable  gain! for them  is a reward  with their  
Lord,  and Allah  is swift  in account."  (A1 Imran  199)
^ OV-r 1*- Kj ^A.<y=S\  Jil^ ojj ^
According  to an ancient  man: "The learned  men (of the hereafter)  will be 
mustered  in the company  of the Prophets,  whereas  the judges  in the company  of 
the rulers."  The concept  of a judge here implies  every jurisprudent  whose  
intention  is to seek after this world  through  his knowledge.120


Page 123:
Book  One: Knowledge
It is narrated  (by Ibn Abd Al-Barr)  on the authority  of Abu Ad-Darda'  
"Allah  be pleased  with him" that the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him"  
said: "Allah  Almighty  revealed  to one of the Prophet  (to convey  the following  
message):  'Say to those  who pursue  the science  of jurisprudence  for anything  
else other  than the purpose  of maintaining  the principles  of religion,  and learn  
knowledge  for anything  else other than to act upon it, and seek after this 
world through  the deeds of the hereafter,  who seem, in the sight of the 
people,  as amiable  as rams,  even though  their hearts  are the hearts  of wolves,  
whose  tongues  are sweeter  than honey,  even though  their hearts are more  
bitter  than aloes,  who deceive  Me, and take Me as a laughing  stock,  that I will 
open  for them a gate of affliction,  which  will leave the most  forbearing  in the 
state of confusion."
It is narrated  (by At-Tabarani)  on the authority  of Ibn Abbas "Allah be 
pleased  with both"  that the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "The  
learned  men of this nation  are of two types of men: a man who has been given  
knowledge  by Allah Almighty,  which  he has sacrificed  for the people,  with no 
reward  he has taken  greedily  from them,  nor has he sold it for a small  price:  it is 
that upon  whom  the birds in the sky, the fish in the water,  the beasts  on earth,  
and the honourable  scribes  (from amongst  the angels)  invoke  prayer.  He will 
come  upon  Allah  Almighty  on the Day of Judgement  as a noble  master,  until he 
joins the sent Messengers.  And a man who has been given  knowledge  by Allah  
Almighty  in this world,  which  he has withheld  from the slaves  of Allah,  taken  
charge  for it with greediness,  and sold it for a small  price:  it is this who  will come  
on the Day of Judgement,  reined  with a rein of fire, and it will be called  publicly  
before  all the creatures:  'This is so and so, son of so and so, whom  Allah  
Almighty  had given knowledge  in the world,  which  he had withheld  from His 
servants,  taken  charge  for it with greediness,  and sold it for a small  price'.  He will 
be kept in punishment  until (Allah)  will finish from the reckoning  of all the 
people."
More grievous  is the following  narration:  It is narrated  that a man, who  
worked  in the service  of Moses,  used to say: 'Moses,  whom  Allah  Almighty  has 
chosen  told me such and such' 'Moses,  whom  Allah  Almighty  has saved  told me 
such and such' 'Moses,  whom  Allah  Almighty  has communicated  told me such  
and such' until he became  rich, and had abundance  of wealth.  Moses  "Peace  be 
upon  him"  lost him, and enquired  about  him, but he received  no news  about  him.  
One day, a man came  to him, having  a pig in his hand,  in whose  neck  there  
black  string.  Moses  "Peace  be upon  him" asked  him: "Do you know  so and so?"  
he said: "Yes.  It is that pig." Moses  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "O Lord!  I ask you 
to restore  him to his original  state, so that I could ask him why he had been  
transformed  as such."  Allah  Almighty  revealed  to him: "If you invoke  me with  
the same  with which  Adam  and those  who came  after  him invoked  me, I would  
not respond  to your  invocation  pertaining  to him. But, I'm going  to tell you why I 
had done that with him: that's because  he sought  after this world through  
religion."121
was a


Page 124:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
More  heinous  is the following  tradition  (by Abu Na'im)  on the authority  
of Mu'adh  which  ends up with him in one narration,  and which  he traces  up 
to the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon him" in another  narration:  "It is
might  be tempted  that speaking  
becomes  dearer  to him than listening."  Of a surety,  speech  is always  subject  
to embellishment  and accretion,  because  of which  the speaker  might  not be 
secure from falling  in mistakes,  whereas  silence  brings about safety and 
knowledge.
But from  amongst  the learned  men, there  is he who stores  his knowledge,  and 
likes that none should  share  it with him; and this will be in the lowest  and the 
first depth  of the fire (of Hell).  There  is also he who likes to occupy  the position  
of a chief  in his knowledge  in the sense  that if he is contradicted  or even slighted  
he grows  angry;  and this will be in the second  depth  of the fire (of Hell).  There  is 
he who limits  his knowledge  to those of nobility  and wealth  regarding  the poor  
unworthy  of it; and this will be in the third  depth  of the fire (of Hell).  There  is he 
who appoints  himself  in the office  of giving  religious  verdicts,  and hands  down  
faulty  opinions,  and of a surety,  Allah  Almighty  dislikes  those  who make things  
difficult  upon  themselves;  and this will be in the fourth  depth  of the fire (of Hell).  
There  is such of learned  men as insert in his discourse  Jewish  and Christian  
arguments  in order  to make  his knowledge  seem  abundant;  and this will be in the 
fifth depth of the fire (of Hell). There is he who considers  his knowledge  
something  virtuous  and honourable  and a source  of celebration  among  men;  and 
this will be in the sixth depth of the fire (of Hell), there is also he who is 
motivated  by vanity and conceit.  Whenever  he preaches  he upbraids,  and 
whenever  he is admonished  he shows  arrogance;  and this will be in the seventh  
depth  of the fire (of Hell).  So, O brother,  observe  silence,  for through  it you will 
overpower  Satan.  Do not laugh  without  a cause  and do not move  without  a goal.
According  to another  tradition:  "A servant  might  receive  a lot of thanks  as 
much  as to fill what  is between  the heaven  and the earth,  even though  he is less 
than the weight  of the wing of a mosquito  in the Sight  of Allah  Almighty."  It is 
narrated  that a man brought  to Al-Hassan,  after he had turned  away from his 
session,  a case containing  five thousand  Dirhams  and ten garments  made  of fine 
silk and said to him: "O Abu Al-Hassan  say to him: "Might  Allah  Almighty  repair  
you! Take  back your spending  and clothing,  since  we are not in need for that. It 
should  be known  that he, who sits in the like of my gathering  (to preach  the 
people)  and accepts  from the people  the like of that, will meet  Allah,  on the Day  
of  Judgement,  having  no share  (of Allah's  reward)."
It is narrated  (by Abu Na'im)  on the authority  of Jabir  that the Messenger  of 
Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "Sit not in the gathering  of a learned  man unless  
he summons  you from  five (vices)  to accept  five (good  things):  from  suspicion  to 
certainty  (of faith),  from showing  off (and doing  things  in order  to be seen of 
men) to sincerity  (in your deeds),  from desire  (for the pleasures  and delights  of122
one of the things  by which  a learned  man


Page 125:
Book  One:  Knowledge
this world) to asceticism  (and refraining  from the worldly  benefits),  from  
arrogance  to humbleness,  and from showing  enmity  to giving advice (with  
sincerity  to each other)."
Allah  Almighty  says in this respect:  " So he went forth among  his people  in 
the (pride  of his worldly)  glitter.  Said those  whose  aim is the Life of this World:  
"Oh! that we had the like of what  Qarun  has got! For he is truly a lord of mighty  
good  fortune!"  But those  who had been granted  (true) knowledge  said: "Alas for 
you! The reward  of Allah (in the Hereafter)  is best for those who believe  and 
work righteousness:  but this none shall attain, save those who steadfasdy  
persevere  (in good).""  (Al-Qasas  79:80)
0 <jj' LJ Lh jJT 5_^jl 'J* £j^ \
^4^ d p Ihj* -d j4J ■>**!
Thus, these of knowledge  are recognized  by their giving priority  to the 
hereafter  over  the world.
One of those distinctive  characteristics  is that his deed should not 
contradict  his word  in the sense that he should  not enjoin  anything  unless  he is 
the first to do it, in compliance  with Allah's  statement:  "Should  you enjoin  good  
upon  the people  and forget  yourselves?"  (Al-Baqarah  44)
^(05^SLliji  }
He Almighty  further  says: "Grievously  odious  is it in the sight of Allah that 
you say that which  you do not." (As-Saff  3)
4 d  J jdaJ C* I jJ yiu I 4U I Jj-p ^
He also says in the story  of Hud (on his tongue  while  addressing  his people):  
"I wish not, in opposition  to you, to do that which  I forbid  you to do. I only  
desire  (your)  betterment  to the best of my power."  (Hud  88)
i^  }£=d£ \XA JJ o' -Ly'43 }
He says too: "So fear Allah;  for it is Allah  that teaches  you. And Allah  is well  
acquainted  with  all things."  (Al-Baqarah  282)123
He says: " But fear Allah,  and listen (to His counsel):  for Allah  guides  not a 
rebellious  people."  (Al-Ma'idah  108)
i © 1 y^ v3 ^ }
He Almighty  said to Jesus: "O son of Mary! Admonish  yourself:  if you 
receive  admonition,  you might  give admonition  to the people,  otherwise,  feel 
shy of Me!" (It is narrated  by Ibn Hibban  on the authority  of Anas that) the 
Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "On the very night  I was made


Page 126:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
to set out on the Night  Journey,  I came  upon  a people,  whose  lips were being  
filed with files of fire. I asked  them: "Who  are you?" they said: "We used to 
enjoin  good upon the people,  even though  we did it not, and forbid  them to 
do evil, even though  we did it."" (It is narrated  by 158 on the authority  of 
that) the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "The destruction  of 
my nation  will be at the hands  of a wicked  learned  man (of falsehood),  and an 
ignorant  worshipper;  and the worst  of the evil ones are the evil learned  men  
(of falsehood),  and the best of the good ones are the good learned  men (of 
the hereafter)."
According  to Al-Awza'i  "Might  Allah  bestow  mercy  upon  him":  The land larva  
complained  to Allah the stench  of the corpse  of the infidels  from which  they  
were suffering,  thereupon  Allah revealed  to them that 'the bellies of the evil 
learned  men (of falsehood)  are more foul-smelling  than that from which  you are 
suffering'."  According  to Al-Fudail  Ibn Iyad "Might  Allah bestow  mercy  upon  
him": "On the Day of Judgement,  the wicked  among  the learned  men will be 
brought  forward  for reckoning  before  the idolaters."  According  to Abu Ad- 
Darda'  "Allah  be pleased  with him": "Wretched  be him once, who does not 
know,  and wretched  be he seven  times,  who knows  and does not act upon  what  
he knows."
According  to Ash-Sha'bi:  "On the Day of Judgement,  some  of the inhabitants  
of the Garden  will appear  to some  from the denizens  of the fire (of Hell) and ask 
them: "What  has caused  you to enter the fire (of Hell), even though  Allah  
Almighty  has admitted  us to the Garden  by virtue of your instructing  and 
teaching  us?" they  will say: "We used to enjoin  good  but do it not, and forbid  evil, 
but do it" According  to Hatim  Al-Asamm:  "On the Day of Judgement,  there  will 
be none more distressed  than a learned  man, who has taught  a people  his 
knowledge,  upon  which  they acted  upon (in the world),  even though  he did not 
do, thereupon  they attained  felicity because  of that, but he was given to 
destruction."  According  to Malik  Ibn Dinar:  "Unless  a learned  man acts upon  his 
knowledge,  his preaching  will vanish  from hearts  in the same way as a drop of 
water  evaporates  from  a rock."
It was said in the form of poetry:  "O preacher  of the people!  You've  become  
unreliable  (in your religion)  since you chide many of their acts, which  you do 
yourself.  You strive  your  utmost  to advise  them  by your  preaching  (to do what  is 
right and refrain  from  what  is evil), even though,  by my life, you commit  such of 
sins as are destructive.  You condemn  the world  and those  who have desire  for it, 
even though  your  yearning  for it is much  greater  than theirs."
According  to another  poet: "Forbid  not an act the like of which  you do: it is 
great  shameful  upon  you to do so."
Ibrahim  Ibn Adham  "Might  Allah  bestow  mercy  upon  him" said: I came  upon  
a stone in Mecca,  on which the following  phrase was written:  "Turn me 
perchance  you would  take lesson."  I turned  it and behold!  The following  was 
written  on it: "Since  you act not upon  what  you know:  how should  you pursue  
the knowledge  of that which  you do not know?"  according  to Ibn As-Simak124


Page 127:
Book  One: Knowledge 125
"Allah's  mercy  be upon  him":  "Many  are those  who remind  of Allah,  even  though  
they themselves  forget  (the celebration  of) Allah!  Many  
others  from (the punishment  of) Allah,  even though  they themselves  fear Allah  
not! Many  are those who bring  others  much closer  to Allah,  even though  they  
themselves  are far from Allah!  Many  are those  who invite  others  to Allah,  even  
though  they themselves  flee away from  Allah!  Many  are those  who recite  Allah's  
Book,  even though  they themselves  abandon  Allah's  Signs."
Ibrahim  Ibn Adham  "Might  Allah  bestow  mercy  upon  him" said: <cWhen  
speak,  we are always  careful  not to commit  errors  in language,  but when  we do 
deeds,  we commit  errors  and fall short  of the ideal set before  us.” According  to 
Al-Awza'i:  "When  one comes to be careful  not to commit  errors in speech  
(during  the religious  service)  he looses  submission."those  who frightens are
we
It is narrated  (by Ibn Abd Al-Barr  and Ad-Darimi)  on the authority  of Makhul  
from Abd Ar-Rahman  Ibn Ghunm  from ten from  amongst  the holy companions  
of the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" that they said: We were studying  
knowledge  in the mosque  of Quba'  when  the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  
him" came out to us and said: "Learn  as much  knowledge  as you like to know,  
but Allah  will give you no reward  unless  you act (upon  what  you learn)."
According  to Jesus "Peace  be upon him": "The example  of him who learns  
knowledge  upon which  he acts not is like the example  of a woman  who has 
committed  adultery  in secrecy,  which  resulted  in her pregnancy,  and when  her 
pregnancy  became  visible,  she was ashamed.  The same  is true of him who does  
not act upon  his knowledge,  thereupon  Allah  Almighty  will openly  disgrace  him 
on the Day of Judgement  before  the people."  According  to Mu'adh  "Allah  be 
pleased  with him": "Beware  of the slip of the learned  man, for he is highly  
estimated  by the people,  who,  in turn, might  imitate  him in his slip." According  
to Umar  "Allah  be pleased  with him": "When  a learned  man falls into a slip, a 
multitude  of people  commit  that error  in imitation  of him."  According  to Umar  
"Allah  be pleased  with him": "There  are three things,  because  of which  the time  
will come  to an end, one of which  is the slip of a learned  man."
Ibn Mas'ud  "Allah  be pleased  with him" said: "A time will come upon the 
people,  in which  the sweetness  of hearts  will become  salty,  thereupon  neither  the 
man of knowledge  nor the learner  will be able to get benefit  from  the knowledge;  
and that's  because  the hearts  of their  learned  men will be like the salty  land,  which  
will fail to become  sweet  and fresh even if the rain of the sky descend  upon  it." 
That will happen  when  the hearts  of the learned  men incline  to the love of this 
world, which they give preference  over the hereafter.  At that time, Allah  
Almighty  will deprive  them  of the resources  of wisdom,  and extinguish  the lamps  
of guidance  from their hearts.  Whenever  you meet  anyone  of their learned  men,  
he will tell you that he fears Allah but this fear will be expressed  only by his 
tongue,  because  the signs of debauchery  and wickedness  will be visible  from his 
deed. On that day, how fertile  and rich will the tongues  be, and how barren  and 
arid will the hearts  be! By Allah,  other  than Whom  there is no god, this will not 
happen  but because  the learned  men teach  knowledge  for something  other  than


Page 128:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
Allah Almighty,  as well as the learners  acquire  knowledge  for something  other  
than Allah Almighty.  According  to both Torah and Gospel  the following  is 
written:  "Ask not to learn that which  you do not know  until you act upon that 
which  you know."
Hudhaifah  "Allah  be pleased  with him" said: "You  now  live in a time,  in which  
if anyone  of you gives  up one-tenth  what  he knows,  he will be ruined;  and a time  
will come  upon  the people  in which  if anyone  of them  acts upon  only one-tenth  
what he knows,  he will be saved;  and this is in view of the prolific  number  of 
those  who are idle."
It should  be known  that the example  of the learned  man is like the example  of 
the judge.  In this respect  (it is unanimously  narrated  on the authority  of Buraidah  
that) the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "There  are three  types  of 
judges:  one judges  with the truth knowingly,  and such  will be in the Garden;  and 
one judges  with injustice  whether  knowingly  or unknowingly,  and such will be in 
the fire (of Hell);  and one judges  in opposition  to what  Allah has commanded,  
and such  will be in the fire (of Hell)."."
According  to Ka'b "Might  Allah  bestow  mercy  upon  him": "Towards  the end 
of the time, there  will be learned  men, who will urge the people  to abstain  from  
this world,  even though  they themselves  will not refrain  from it, frighten  the 
people  (from  the punishment  of Allah),  even though  they  will fear not, forbid  the 
people  to seek the favours  of the rulers and governors,  even though  they  
themselves  will pursue  their favours.  They  will give priority  to this world  over the 
hereafter.  They  will slander  the people  with their tongues,  and approach  the rich 
wealthy  apart from the poor. They will contest  with each other because  of 
jealousy  over knowledge  in the same  way as women  contest  because  of jealousy  
over men. One of them  will grow  angry  with his sitter  in case he sits with anyone  
else. They  are the compellers,  the enemies  of (Allah)  Most  Gracious."
(It is narrated  on the authority  of Anas  that) the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be 
upon him" said: "Satan  would  keep baiting  you with knowledge."  It was said:  
"How  would  that be O Messenger  of Allah?"  he "Peace  be upon  him" said: "He  
would  say to you: 'Seek after knowledge,  and did nothing  until you have full 
knowledge'.  In this way, he would  continue  to seek after knowledge,  and defer  
doing  anything  until  he dies without  doing  any deeds."
According  to Sari As-Saqta:  A man who was eager to pursue  the exoteric  
knowledge  secluded  himself  to religious  service,  and when  I asked  him about  the 
reason  he said: "I saw in a dream  somebody  having  said to me: 'How  long will 
you keep wasting  knowledge,  might  Allah  waste  you?"  I said: "I preserve  it." He 
said: "Then  (you should  know  that) to preserve  knowledge  is to act upon  it." On 
that I gave up its pursuit,  and rather  turned  to (putting  it to practice  by) doing  
deeds."
According  to Ibn Mas'ud  "Allah  be pleased  with him": "Verily,  knowledge  
does not lie in retaining  a prolific  number  of narrations,  but it rather  lies in 
entertaining  the fear (of Allah  in the heart)."  According  to Al-Hassan:  "Learn  as 
much  knowledge  as you like to know,  but by Allah,  Allah  Almighty  will give you126


Page 129:
Book  One:  Knowledge -----------------------------------------------------------------
no reward  until you act (upon what you know).  Verily,  the weak-minded  are 
mainly concerned  with the narration,  whereas  the learned  men are mainly  
concerned  with preserving  (knowledge  through  acting  upon it)." According  to 
Malik  "Allah's  mercy  be upon  him" said: "Verily,  seeking  after  knowledge  is good,  
and disseminating  it is good, provided  that the intention  is true. But, consider  
what is necessary  for you from morning  to evening,  and give preference  to 
nothing  over  it."
According  to Ibn Mas'ud  "Allah  be pleased  with him": "Verily,  the Holy  
Qur'an  has been revealed  perchance  you should  act upon  it, but you've  taken  
its study  as means  of acdng  upon  it. A people  will come  later,  who will try to 
modify  it in the same way as an arrow  is modified;  and of a surety,  they will 
not be the good  among  you."  The learned  man who does not do according  to 
his knowledge  is like a sick man who prescribes  treatment  for others,  or like a 
hungry  one who works  out delicious  menus  of food but cannot  taste them.  
Allah Almighty  says in a similar  meaning:  "Woe to you from what you 
describe!"  (Al-Anbiya  18)127
according  to a Prophetic  tradidon  (transmitted  by At-Tabarani  on the 
authority  of Abu Ad-Darda'  that the Prophet  said): "I fear for my nadon  most  
a slip of a learned  man, or a debate  of a hypocrite  in the Qur'an."
From  among  those characteristics,  a mention  might  be made of the fact that 
he should  be mainly  interested  in acquiring  such of sciences  as are of good use 
for the hereafter,  conducive  to the religious  works  of obedience,  avoiding  such of 
sciences  as are of little use, which  lend themselves  to debate  and gossip.  The  
example  of him, who turns away from the practical  knowledge,  and rather  is 
engaged  in argumentation  and debate  is like the example  of a sick man who has 
so many  ailments,  and he happens  to meet a skillful  physician,  and the time is 
very limited,  and instead  of devoting  himself  to his real mission,  which  he is 
required  to achieve,  he occupied  himself  by asking  for the qualities  of drugs  and 
the curiosities  of medicine:  how foolish  this is!
(It is narrated  by Ibn Abd Al-Barr  and Abu Na'im on the authority  of 
Abdullah  Ibn Al-Miswar  that) a man came  to the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be 
upon  him" and said: "Teach  me some  of the curiosities  of knowledge!"  he asked  
him: "What  have you done pertaining  to the beginning  of knowledge?"  he said:  
"What  is the beginning  of knowledge?"  he "Peace  be upon him" asked him:  
"Have  you known  the Lord  Almighty?"  he said: "Yes."  He said: "Then,  what  have  
you done for Him?"  he said: "What  Allah wills."  He further  asked:  "Have  you 
known  the death?"  he answered  in the affirmative,  thereupon  he said: "Then,  
what  have you done in preparation  for it?" he said: "What  Allah  wills. On that 
the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  him" said: "Go and do perfectly  what  
you know  and then come  so that we might  instruct  you in the strange  facts of 
knowledge."
Therefore,  the learner  should  correspond  to the same in connection  with


Page 130:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
whom  it is narrated  from Hatim  AI-Asamm  that Shaqiq  (his mister)  said to him:  
"How long have you been in my company?"  Hatim said: "Since thirty-three  
years."  He asked  him: "How  much  have you learnt  from me during  that period?"  
he said: "Only  eight questions."  Shaqiq  said to him: "We all are to Allah, to 
Whom  we refer! I've spent  my life with you but you learnt  only eight questions."  
He said: "O mister!  I've learnt  nothing  more  than those,  and I do not like to tell a 
lie." He said: "Then,  bring  me those  eight questions,  perchance  I would  listen  to 
them  from  you."
"The first" Hatim  said "I cast a glance  at the creatures,  and see that everyone  
loves  anything  will remain  with whatever  he loves until (it is time for him to die 
and go to) the grave,  and once he reaches  the grave,  he departs  from what he 
loves. Having  understood  that, I've made the good deeds my dearly  loved in 
order  that when  I enter  the grave,  my dearly  loved  will enter  with me." He said:  
"You've  done  well O Hatim!  What  is the second  question?"
He said: "I have considered  Allah's saying: " And for those who had 
entertained  the fear of standing  before  their Lord's  (tribunal)  and had restrained  
(their)  soul from lower  Desires,  Their  Abode  will be the Garden."  (An-Nazi'at  
40:41)128
i Op @ £s$  L5^i *-£3 f cr* $
I then came to know  that Allah's  statement  is the truth,  thereupon  I strived  
myself  so much to repel such lower desires  until it found its abode in the 
obedience  of Allah  Almighty."
"The third is that I've caught  a glimpse  over the creatures  and observed  that 
everyone  has anything  of significance  and high value  would  raise and preserve  it. 
At the same time, I considered  the statement  of Allah: "What  you have will 
inevitably  perish,  and what  is with  Allah  will abide  forever"  (An-Nahl  96)
the result  is that the more  I have anything  of value  and high esteem,  the more  
I direct  it to Allah  Almighty,  perchance  it would  be preserved  with Him."
"The fourth  is that I cast a glance  at the creatures,  and found  that everyone  
refers to wealth,  high social status,  honour  and good ancestry.  I've considered  
them  and behold!  They are of no significance.  At the same time, I've considered  
the statement  of Allah: "Verily,  the most honourable  among  you is the most  
Allah-fearing  of you" (Al-Hujurat  13)
i AT iif oj}
thereupon  I did my best to safeguard  myself  from the punishment  of Allah  
perchance  I would  be regarded  honourable  in the Sight  of Allah."
"The fifth is that I've cast a look  at the creatures  in their slandering  each other  
and cursing  each other,  and the main cause  of that is their mutual  envy. At the 
same time, I've considered  the statement  of Allah  Almighty:  "We've  given  each  
his due portion  of living  in this world."  (Az-Zukhruf  32)


Page 131:
Book  One:  Knowledge 129
4 © ^ ^ L^-Sj  ^ £
Thereupon  I gave up the envy, and isolated  myself  from the people,  and 
came to know that everyone ’s portion  (in this life) is determined  by Allah  
Almighty.  For this reason,  I turned  to have no feeling  of enmity  towards  the 
people."
"The sixth is that I’ve cast a glance at the people,  and found them  
transgressing  over each other,  and fighting  each other,  thereupon  I returned  
to the statement  of Allah: "Verily,  Satan is an enemy  to you, so, take it as 
enemy."  (Fatir  6)
taking  from this, I considered  Satan  alone  my enemy,  and strove  my utmost  to 
be caudous  of him, for Allah  Almighty  bears  witness  that he is an enemy  to me; 
and the result  was that I came to have no feeling  of enmity  towards  anyone  else 
from  amongst  the creatures."
"The seventh  is that I have cast a glance  at the creatures,  and detected  that 
everyone  of them pursues  a fragment  (of livelihood),  for which  he humiliates  
himself,  and does what is unlawful  for him to do. At the same time, I've 
considered  the Statement  of Allah  Almighty:  "There  is no moving  thing  on earth  
but that its sustenance  is incumbent  upon  Allah."  (Hud  6)
4 •(|2 l <4 & ^3 * £
on that I came to know that I'm one of those moving  things,  whose  
sustenance  is incumbent  upon  Allah  Almighty.  The result  was that I came to 
be engaged  in what  Allah  has enjoined  upon  me, and entrusted  to Him what I 
have with him."
"The eighth  is that I have caught  a glimpse  over the creatures  and found  
everyone  of them having  put his trust in that which  is created  (like him): one in 
his property,  one in his trade,  one in his profession,  and one in his good health.  
In short,  every creature  has put his trust in another  creature  like him. Then,  I 
have returned  to the statement  of Allah Almighty:  "He, who puts his trust in 
Allah,  He suffices  him (for Helper  and Supporter)."  (At-Talaq  3)
The result  was that I came to put my trust in Allah  Almighty,  for He suffices  
me (for Helper  and Supporter)."  On that Shaqiq  (his mister)  said to him: "O 
Hatim!  Might  Allah Almighty  grant you success!  Of a surety,  I've studied  all 
sciences  implied  in the Torah,  the Gospel,  the Psalms,  and the Holy  criterion  (i.e. 
the Qur'an),  and found  that all kinds  of good  and faith depend  upon  those  eight  
questions.  So, if one puts them to practice,  he will have put the (principles  of all 
the) four Scriptures  to practice."
It is only the learned  men  
understanding  and making  sense to the existence  of this kind of science.  But theof the hereafter  who are mainly  concerned  with


Page 132:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
learned  men of this world  are mainly  engaged  in that with facilitates  for them  the 
getting  of wealth,  prestige  and power,  and neglect  such sciences  (of the hereafter),  
with which  Allah Almighty  sent all of the Messengers  and Prophets  "Peace  be 
upon all of them".  According  to Ad-Dahhak  Ibn Muzahim:  'Tve joined  them,  
while  their habit  was to learn nothing  from each other  but piety,  and now, they  
learn  nothing  from  each other  but scholastic  theology."
One of those  distinctive  features  that he should  not be inclined  to lead a 
comfortable  life including  the indulgence  in food and drink, the luxury  in his 
dress,  furniture  and housing.  On the contrary,  he should  give priority  to economy  
in all of that, in imitation  of the good  ancestors  "Might  Allah  bestow  mercy  upon  
them",  and incline  to be satisfied  with the minimum  requirements  of all of that;  
and the more he is inclined  to the side of penury,  the closer  he draws to the 
Presence  of Allah  Almighty,  and the higher  he is raised  up in rank to the party  of 
the learned  men of the hereafter.
In confirmation  to that, it is narrated  from Abu Abdullah  AJ-Khawas,  a 
companion  of Hatim  Al-Asamm  that he said: “Once I and Hatim,  in the 
company  of three hundred  and twenty  pilgrims  arrived  at Ajr-Rayy.  We were all 
going  to Mecca  for performing  Hajj. The men had their woollen  cloaks  but ran 
short  of provisions  and provision  bags. On arriving  at AJ-Rayy  we came  upon  an 
ascetic  merchant  who loved the poor. He offered  us shelter  and food for the 
night.  In the morning  our host asked  Hatim:  "Do you have anything  to do for 
you? Indeed,  I want to visit a patient  jurisprudent  to enquire  about  his health  in 
the town."  Hatim  replied:  "Visiting  the patient  is meritorious,  and hearkening  
unto the learned  is a form of religious  service.  I shall accompany  you/ The  
patient  jurisprudent  was Muhammad  Ibn Muqatil,  the judge  of Ajr-Rayy.  As they  
arrived  at the gate of his mansion  they saw a great  and striking  palace.  This made  
Hatim  wonder  and say (to himself):  ‘How does such a palace  belong  to the 
property  of a learned  man/ On being admitted  they entered  the palace  and 
behold!  they were in the midst of an impressive  wide spacious  house with  
luxurious  curtains  and draperies.  But Hatim  still wondered.  They then stepped  
into the hall in which  the patient  was lying on a soft mattress.  Over his head  
stood  a lad waving  a fan. While  Hatim  remained  standing  the merchant  sat down  
beside  Ibn Muqatil  and inquired  about  his health.  Noticing  that Hatim  was still 
standing,  Ibn Muqatil  beckoned  to him to sit down  but Hatim  said: 'No, I will 
not sit down.'  Ibn Muqatil  then exclaimed:  'Then,  perhaps  there  is something  I 
might  do for you!' Hatim  replied:  "Yes I wish to ask you a question/  Ibn Muqatil  
said: ‘Ask/ Hatim  replied:  ‘Sit up perchance  I might  ask you! ’ Ibn Muqatil  sat up 
and Hatim  asked him: "From  where  did you learn the knowledge  which  you 
have?'  He said: ’From  trustworthy  reporters  who related  their knowledge  to me 
directly/  Hatim  asked:  ‘And wherefrom  did they get theirs? ’ he said: ‘From  the 
holy Companions  of the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him"/ Hatim  
further  asked:  ‘And wherefrom  did the Companions  get theirs? ’ he said: ‘From  
the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him"/  Hatim  asked:  ‘And wherefrom  did 
the Messenger  get his? ’ he said: ‘From Gabriel  who got his from Allah130


Page 133:
131 Book  One: Knowledge  
Almighty.'  Hatim  said: ‘Tell me then,  in that which  Gabriel  received  from  Allah  
and transmitted  to the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  him" who related  it 
to his companions  who conveyed  it to trustworthy  transmitters  who in turn  
handed  it down to you, did you hear of any learned  man who advanced  in 
worth  in the Sight of Allah because  he led a life of luxury  in his house  and 
because  his wealth  exceeded  that of a governor? ’ he said: ‘No.' Hatim  asked:  
What  have you learnt  then from those trustworthy  transmitters? ’ Ibn Muqadl  
replied:  ‘I have learnt  that he who refrains  from this world  and seeks after the 
hereafter,  shows  love to the poor  and prepares  himself  for the hereafter,  will be 
favoured  by Allah. ’ Hatim  then said: The example  of whom  have you followed  
then,  that of the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" and his Companions  
and their righteous  followers  or that of Pharaoh  and Numrudh,  the first to use 
gypsum  and bricks in masonry?  O teachers  of falsehood!  The ignorant  man  
who has a lustful  desire  for the pleasures  of this world  would  see you and your  
fellows  and would  say to himself:  'If the learned  men lead such a life, there  is no 
reason  why I should  not do the same. ” Having  said this, Hatim  left, and Ibn 
Muqatil ’s sickness  was aggravated.
The news of that soon became  in circulation  among  the people  of Ar-Rayy  
and they informed  Hatim  that At-Tanafisi  in Qazwin  was more extravagant.  
Hearing  this, Hatim  made  his journey  to Qazwin  and on his arrival,  called  on At- 
Tanafisi  and addressed  him saying:  ‘Might  Allah  bestow  mercy  upon  you! I am a 
non-Arab  who wishes  you would  instruct  me in the principles  of my religion  and 
the commencement  of my prayer,  namely,  how to perform  ablution  preparatory  
to service. ’ At-Tanafisi  rose up while  Hatim  was watching.  At-Tanafisi  performed  
ablution  applying  water  thrice  to each part of his body  that should  receive  water,  
and told Hatim  to perform  ablution  in the same  way. Hatim  then said: ‘Could  you 
please  stay where  you are until I perform  ablution  before  you and thus be sure I 
have  learnt  it correctly? ’ At-Tanafisi  moved  aside  and Hatim  went  on to perform  
ablution.  When  he got to the washing  of his arms up to the elbows  he applied  
water  four times.  At-Tanafisi  said: *You  have transgressed  the due limits. ’ Hatim  
asked:  ‘In what respect? ’ he said: ‘In washing  your arms four (instead  of three)  
times. ’ On that Hatim  exclaimed:  ‘Glory  be to Allah!  For using  an extra handful  
of water  you think  I have transgressed  the due limits,  but as to your  indulgence  in 
all this luxury  you do not render  yourself  extravagant. ’ At-Tanafisi  then came  to 
know  that Hatim ’s real purpose  was to admonish  him rather  than to learn from  
him. He entered  his home  and did not come  to see the people  for forty  days.
When  Hatim  entered  Baghdad,  its inhabitants  came to him and said: “O Abu  
Abd Ar-Rahman!  Although  you are a non-Arab  (who does not speak Arabic  
fluently  like the native  speakers),  no one ever talks to you but that you silence  
him." Hatim  replied:  ‘Werily,  I have three characteristics  which  enable  me to 
overpower  my adversary:  I rejoice  when  he is right,  grieve  when  he is wrong,  and 
make  an effort  not to act foolishly  towards  him. ” When  the grand  imam  Ahmad  
Ibn Hanbal  heard this he said: “Glory  be to Allah!  how great is the wisdom  of 
this man! Come!  Let us call on him. ” When  they entered  his house,  Ibn Hanbal


Page 134:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 132
addressed  him saying:  “O Abu Abd Ar-Rahman!  What  will grant  salvation  from  
this world? ” Hatim  replied:  “O Abu Abdullah!  You will not be saved (from  this 
Id) until you have four characteristics:  Overlook  men ’s ignorance,  spare  them wor
yours,  give them from you substance  and except  nothing  from theirs.  You will 
not be saved  until you do these. ”
He then turned  to Medina  where  he was welcomed  by its inhabitants.  He 
said to them: 'Which  city is this? ’ They replied:  The city of the Messenger  of 
Allah  "Peace  be upon  him". ’ He asked:  ‘Where  is the palace  of the Messenger  of 
Allah "Peace  be upon  him" perchance  I might  go and offer prayer  in it?” they  
said: ‘He had no palace,  but all he had was a modest  house  half-buried  in the 
ground. ’ He said: 'Where  then are the palaces  of his Companions? ’ they said:  
‘They  had no palaces,  but all they had were modest  houses  half-buried  in the 
ground. ’ Hatim  said: ‘O Men!  This is then the city of Pharaoh! ’ having  become  
angry,  they took him unto the governor  and said: ‘This non-Arab  says that this 
is the city of Pharaoh. ’ The governor  asked Hatim  why he had said so, and 
Hatim  replied:  ‘Be not hasty  with me! I am a non-Arab  stranger  in this city.  
When  I arrived  in it I inquired  whose  city it was and was told that it was the city 
of the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him".  I then asked  where  his palace  
was. Hatim  then recalled  the whole  story  with the following  Qur'anic  quotation  
in the end: "You  had in the Apostle  of Allah  a good example  (to follow)"  (Al- 
Ahzab  21)!
>- Oj-w I 4AJI (J j ^S\J ^ JJU ^
after which he said: ‘Whose  example  have you then followed,  that of the 
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" or that of Pharaoh,  the first to use 
gypsum  and brick  in masonry? ’ Hearing  that, they released  him and let him go 
safely. ” This is the story of Hatim  Al-Asamm  "Might  Allah Almighty  bestow  
mercy  upon  him".  Later  on, the adoption  of asceticism  and leaving  luxury  in life 
will be attested  by the biographies  and stories  of the good ancestors  which  will 
come  in their due course.
What  is true is that using such of things  as permissible  for ornament  is not 
unlawful  although  its practice  leads to having  affection  for it which  is hard upon  
one to give up. Persistence  in adornment  is not possible  except  through  practices  
which  will inevitably  lead to committing  sins such as adulation,  compromise,  and 
hypocrisy  as well as to other  prohibited  offenses.  It is then wise to avoid these  
things  because  whoever  indulges  in the luxuries  of this world  would  never be 
safe. Had salvation  been compatible  with indulgence  in luxury,  the Messenger  of 
Allah "Peace  be upon  him" would  not have been  insistent  on refraining  from the 
delights  and pleasures  of this world  even to the extent  that he took off the shirt  
embroidered  with marks  and threw  away the gold ring during  his sermon  (once  
he noticed  that the people  imitated  him and took on gold rings);  and this will be 
discussed  later.
It is narrated  that Yahya  Ibn Yazid  An-Nawfali  wrote  to Malik  Ibn Anas the 
following:  “In the name  of Allah,  Most  Gracious,  Most  Merciful.  Allah's  blessing!
i


Page 135:
Book  One:  Knowledge
and peace  be upon  His Aposde  Muhammad.  From  Yahya  Ibn Yazid  Ibn Abd Al- 
Malik  to Malik  Ibn Anas: I have been informed  that you wear fine clothes,  eat 
well-baked  and prepared  food, recline on comfortable  couches,  and have  
chamberlains  at your door. At the same time you have assumed  the seat of 
learning  and men have come  to you from every  direction,  regarding  you as their  
imam  and accepting  your decisions  as the final word.  Fear then Allah O Malik,  
and stick to humbleness.  I have written  to you this letter of advice,  whose  
contents  no one besides  Allah  has seen. Peace  be upon  you. ”
Malik's  reply went as follows:  “In the name of Allah Most Gracious,  Most  
Merciful.  Allah's  blessing  be upon Muhammad,  our master,  as well as upon  his 
family  and Companions.  From  Malik  Ibn Anas  to Yahya  Ibn Yazid:  Allah's  peace  
be upon  you. To go further:  I've received  your letter  which  I accept  as indicating  
your sincere  counsel  and sympathy  for me, which  shows  your refined  character.  
Might  Allah  bless  you in piety  and reward  and help you attain  prosperity  for your  
advice.  I ask Allah to grant  me success;  there is no strength  nor power  but with  
Allah,  Most High, Most Great.  As to your charge  that we eat well-baked  and 
prepared  food,  wear fine clothes,  take chamberlains  at our door,  and recline  on 
comfortable  couches,  it is true that we do all these  but at the same time,  we ask 
for Allah's  forgiveness.  Let's mention  in this respect  that Allah  Almighty  says in 
His Book:  "Say: 'What  has prohibited  Allah ’s goodly  raiment,  and the beneficial  
viands  which He has provided  for His servants?' ” Furthermore  we know for 
certainty  that refraining  from these things is better than indulgence  in them.  
Anyway,  do not neglect  us in the matter  of writing  and in no way shall  we neglect  
you. Peace  be upon  you.”
Consider  here how Malik was just and fair in his reply: he admitted  that 
refraining  from these  things  was better  than indulgence  in them,  but at the same  
time he made a mention  of the opinion  that they were permissible;  and of a 
surety,  he has told the truth  in both.  Nevertheless,  this might  not be possible  but 
for such men as Malik  whose  jusdce  enabled  him to admit  the fairness  of such  
advice,  and be, at the same  time,  too powerful  to confine  himself  to that which  is 
permissible,  without  being  led to adulation,  adoration,  and transgressing  the due 
bounds  of doing  what is undesirable.  But anyone  other than him might  not be 
able to do the same.  To be sure, to flirt with luxury  in what  is permissible  is very  
dangerous,  and it is far from piety and Allah-fearingness.  Piety and Allah-  
fearingness  are characteristic  of the learned  men of Allah Almighty,  and what  
characterizes  such  Allah-fearingness  is to be far from  the manners  of risk.
One of those characteristics  is that one should  keep himself  aloof from  
magistrate,  in the sense  that he should  not visit them  as long  as there  is a way for 
him to flee from  that. Moreover,  he should  avoid  mixing  with them.  If they make  
their  effort  to seek him out, it should  be known  that this world  (with  its pleasures  
and delights)  is sweet  and fresh,  whose  rein is in the hands  of those  magistrates;  
and he who associates  with them,  whatever  he might  be, is forced  to do his best  
to please  them,  and win their hearts,  even  though  they might  be wrongdoers.  For 
this reason,  it is binding  upon  every  religious  man to condemn  them  by showing133


Page 136:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 134
their  wrongness,  and decrying  their  practices.
But unfortunately,  their  visitor  might  either  be tempted  by their  luxury  of life, 
which  develops  in him the scorn  of Allah's  favour  upon  him, or keep silent  and 
to reject their misdeeds,  in order to court their favour,  or endeavour  to cease
speak  in such a manner  as to justify  their crimes  in order to please  them and 
embellish  their standing,  and this is the evident  falsehood,  or be desirous  for 
getting  something  of their luxuries,  and this is the downright  lawlessness.  A 
discussion  of what is permissible  to accept  from the riches of magistrates  and 
what  is not permissible,  especially  such things  as jobs and rewards,  will be taken  
up in the Book  on what  is Lawful  and what  is Unlawful).  In short,  their  company  
is a master  key to evil and it is necessary  for the learned  men of the hereafter  to 
be careful  and cautious.
In this context  (it is narrated  by Abu Dawud,  At-Tirmidhi  and An-Nasa'i  on 
the authority  of Ibn Abbas  that) the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" said: "He, who lives in the desert  will become  ruthless;  and 
he, who is entirely  engaged  in chasing  and hunting  will become  heedless;  and he, 
who frequents  the company  of the magistrates  will be led astray."  (It is further  
narrated  by Muslim  on the authority  of Umm  Salamah  that) the Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" also said: "There  will be 
appointed  over you chiefs some of whose  acts you will accept,  and some of 
whose  acts you will reject.  Whoever  rejects  will be held guiltless  and whoever  
dislikes  them  will be safe. But whoever  admits  them  and follows  them  in that will 
be moved  far by Allah Almighty."  It was said to him: "Should  we not fight  
them?"  he "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "No, as long as they  
offer  prayer."
According  to Sufyan:  "In Hell, there is a valley,  in which none will reside  
barring  the reciters  (of the Qur'an)  who (intend  with their knowledge  only to) 
frequent  the kings." According  to Hudhaifah:  "Beware  of the stations  of 
afflictions!"  it was said: "What  are they?"  he said: "They  are the gates  of the chiefs  
and governors:  one of you visits a chief,  and makes  belief  of his lie, and praises  
him with such of qualities  as are not in him."
(It is narrated  by Al-Uqaili  on the authority  of Anas that) the Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "The learned  men remain  
the trustees  to whom  the Prophets  and Messengers  entrust  the servants  of Allah  
as long as they do not mix with magistrates.  But once they do so (i.e. associate  
with the magistrates),  they betray the Messengers.  At that time, you should  
beware  of and keep  yourselves  away  from  them."
It was said to Al-A'mash:  "No doubt,  you've  given  life to knowledge  in view  
of the prolific  number  of people  who take it from  you." On that he said: "Be not 
hasty with your judgement!  One-third  (those  who learn) die before  having  full 
perception  of it, one-third  hang down  around  the gates of the magistrates,  and 
they are the worst  of all the creatures,  and it is only a very few who prosper  from  
among  the remaining  third."
For this reason,  it is not strange  to hear Sa'id Ibn Al-Musayyab  "Might  Allah


Page 137:
Book  One:  Knowledge
bestow  mercy  upon  him" saying:  "When  you see a learned  man having  associated  
with the magistrates,  you should  be cautious  of him for at that time he is like a 
thief."  According  to Al-Awza'i  "Might  Allah  bestow  mercy  upon  him":  "There  is 
nothing  more odious  to Allah  than a learned  man who frequents  an official."  (It 
is narrated  by Ibn Majah  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that) the Messenger  of 
Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "The  worst  of learned  men  
are those  who frequent  the chiefs  and governors;  and the best of the chiefs  and 
governors  are those  who come  to (learn  the knowledge  from)  the learned  men."
According  to Makhul  Ad-Dimashqi  "Might  Allah bestow  mercy  upon him":  
"He, who learns  knowledge,  and becomes  well-acquainted  in religion,  and then  
joins the company  of the magistrate,  whom  he adulates  coveting  to get from  what  
he has, will have plunged  into an ocean  of fire in the midst  of Hell, crossing  in it 
as much  as is the number  of his steps  (he takes  towards  him)."
Samnun  said: “How  dim-witted  is the learned  man who is continually  sought  
for in his gathering,  but is never  found  there,  and when  the caller  inquires  about  
his site he is reported  to be at the governor's  house. ” He further  said: “I often  
heard  them having  said that whenever  a learned  man is detected  to be fond of 
this world,  people  should  not then entrust  their faith to him, until I began  to do 
so myself:  I never  called  on a governor  but that I reckoned  myself  on my leaving  
him, and I usually  found  that I was held blameworthy  despite  the fact that, as you 
know,  I have always  confronted  him with rude and harsh  words  and repeatedly  
contradicted  his desires.  But even,  I had hoped  to be saved  from  the humiliation  
of calling  on him, although  I have received  nothing  from him, not even a sip of 
water. ” He then resumed:  "However  the learned  men of our time are even  worse  
than the learned  men of the children  of Israel: they offer to the ruler such of 
concessions  and opinions  as would  conform  to his desires.  Had they reminded  
him of his obligations  and of the things  wherein  lies his salvation,  he would  have  
found  them boring,  and would  have disliked  their visits to him. Nevertheless,  it 
would  have  been  their  own salvation  in the Sight  of their  Lord. ”
Al-Hassan  said: “There  was before  your time a man who had embraced  Islam  
at a very early date and had enjoyed  the company  of the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him". (Abdullah  Ibn Al-Mubarak  reported  
that he meant  Sa'd Ibn Abu Waqqas  "Allah  be pleased  with him").  He did not 
frequent  the company  of governors:  on the contrary  he avoided  them.  One day 
his sons said to him: "Those  whose  Islam  was not as early as yours and who,  
unlike you, did not enjoy the company  of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him",  frequent  the company  of governors:  would  that 
you frequent  their company  (as they do)!" He said: "O my sons! Shall I go to a 
stinking  corpse  surrounded  by my people?  By Allah!  If I can do, I shall never  join 
them."  They said: "O our father!  We shall then die because  of starvation."  He 
said: "I would  rather  die as a believer  because  of starvation  than die as a fat 
hypocrite. ”" Al-Hassan  commented:  "By Allah he rejected  their suggestion,  
because  of his awareness  of the fact that the earth (of the grave)  eats up both  
fatness  and flesh (of the body)  but not the faith.  To be sure, this indicates  that he135


Page 138:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
who frequents  the magistrate  is never  safe from  hypocrisy,  which  contradicts  the 
faith.136
Abu Dharr  said to Salamah:  "O Salamah!  Frequent  not the magistrates,  for 
indeed,  you never  get anything  from the pleasures  of their  world  but that they  
shall  get more  from  your faith."  This is, undoubtedly,  a great  trial to which  the 
learned  men are put, and a significant  instrument  in the hand of Satan  to use 
against  them, and particularly  against  the learned  man who has a pleasant  
voice and an attractive  speech.  Satan persists  in whispering  in his ear that  
through  his preaching  and visits to them he may be able to turn them away  
from injustice  and to induce  them to act upon the principles  of law, until  
finally  the learned  man imagines  that his visits to governors  are an integral  
part of religion.  However,  once he calls on the magistrates,  he begins  to pay 
them compliments  and flatter  them with praise  and eulogy,  wherein  lies the 
destruction  of religion.  Thus  it is said that when  the true learned  men acquire  
knowledge  they go on acting  upon it, and when they really act upon it they  
become  absorbed  in their work, and when they become  absorbed  in their  
work  they lose their interest  in this world,  and when  they lose interest  in this 
world  they seek the way of Allah,  and when they seek the way of Allah they  
turn their  back  and flee from  this world.
Umar  Ibn Abd Al-Aziz  wrote  to Al-Hassan:  "To go further:  Nominate  to me 
some people  whose  aid I might  seek to help me achieve  the matter  of Allah  
Almighty."  His reply went as follows:  "As for the men of religion,  you are not 
their desired  goal, and as for the men of world,  they are not your desired  goal.  
But, I advise  you to seek the nobles,  for they indeed  safeguard  their nobility  from  
being  contaminated  with treachery."
If it is the duty of the learned  men (of the hereafter)  to flee away from Umar  
Ibn Abd Al-Aziz,  who was the most  ascetic  from  amongst  the people  of his time,  
how should  then they consider  it fitting  to seek and mix with  other  rulers,  putting  
in mind that such early men of knowledge  as Al-Hassan,  Ath-Thawri,  Ibn Al- 
Mubarak,  Al-Fudail,  Ibrahim  Ibn Adham,  and Yusuf  Ibn Asbat  pointed  out the 
learned  men of this world,  from  those  of Mecca,  Sham  and the other  cities,  either  
because  of their inclination  to the (pleasures  and delights  of this) world,  or 
because  of their  associating  with the magistrates?
One of those characteristics  is that he should  not be hasty to give  
religious  verdicts:  on the contrary,  he should  stop from and be careful  of 
doing  so as much  as it is possible  for him to flee away form it. If he is asked  
about  what  he know  for certain,  depending  upon  the text of Allah's  Book,  the 
Prophetic  tradition,  the general  unanimity  and consent  of the Muslims,  or the 
right  analogy,  let him then give religious  verdict;  and if he is questioned  about  
something  in which  he has doubt,  let him say: "I do not know";  and in case he 
is asked about  anything  which  he thinks  to be so depending  only upon his 
independent  investigation  and speculation,  let him take care, and avoid falling  
into mistake,  and rather  refer the question  to anyone  else whom  he thinks  to 
be more  capable.:


Page 139:
Book  One: Knowledge
This is the clear wisdom,  for indeed,  it is dangerous  to build one's opinion  
depending  only upon his independent  investigation.  According  to 
tradition  (by Al-Khatib,  Abu Dawud  and Ibn Majah  on the authority  of Abdullah  
Ibn Umar):  "The knowledge  is of three parts: the words  and statement  of the 
Book (i.e. the Holy Qur'an),  the established  sunnah  (of the Prophet),  otherwise  
(the phrase)  'I do not know'  (in case there is no answer  which  has any reference  
in Allah's  Book or the Prophet's  sunnah)."  According  to Ash-Sha'bi:  "(The  
phrase)  'I do not know'  constitutes  half the knowledge;  and the reward  of him,  
who keeps silent of what he knows  not for the Sake of Allah Almighty  is not 
lesser  than him who speaks  (of what  he knows),  for it is more  difficult  upon  one 
to admit  his ignorance."  As such was the habit of the holy companions  and the 
righteous  ancestors  "Allah  be pleased  with them".
Whenever  Ibn Umar  "Allah  be pleased  with both"  was asked  to give a legal  
verdict,  he would  say: "Go to this governor  to was appointed  to be in charge  
of the affairs  of the people,  and make him responsible  for it." According  to 
Ibn Mas'ud  "Allah  be pleased  with him": "He, who gives the people  legal  
verdicts  in ah things  for which  they seek his verdict  is a mad."  He further  said:  
"The refuge  of a learned  man is to say 'I do not know'  (if he is asked  about  
what he really knows  not), and in case he misses  it, of a surety,  he will be 
blighted."  According  to Ibrahim  Ibn Adham  "Might  Allah  bestow  mercy  upon  
him": "Nothing  is more severe  upon Satan than a learned  man, who speaks  
with knowledge,  and keeps silent  also with knowledge,  thereupon  Satan says 
about  him: 'Look  at that (learned  man),  whose  silence  is more  severe  upon  me 
than his speech."'
In description  of the Abdal  (Substitutes),  it was said: “They  eat only when  they  
are gnawed  by the pangs  of hunger;  they rest only  when  they are overpowered  by 
lack of sleep; and they speak only when it is necessary  for them to speak. ” In 
other  words  they do not speak  unless  they are asked  and even then they will not 
talk if they could find someone  to answer  on their behalf.  If it is necessary  for 
them  to speak  they will open their mouths  and reply.  They  consider  the initiative  
to speak  before  being  asked  an expression  of a hidden  lust for speech.
Both  Ali and Abdullah  "Allah  be pleased  with them"  happened  to come  upon  
a man who was talking  to the people,  thereupon  they said: "This  man calls on the 
people  to know him (through  his speech)."  According  to somebody:  "The  
genuine  learned  man is he, who, when asked about  anything,  seems as if his 
premolar  tooth  is taken  removed."  According  to Ibn Umar:  "You  like to make  us 
like a bridge  through  which  you cross  
Hafs An-Naisaburi:  "The genuine  man  
about anything,  entertains  the fear of being questioned,  on the Day of 
Judgement:  'From  where  have you brought  this answer?"'  whenever  Ibrahim  At- 
Taimi  was asked about  anything,  he would  shed tears and say: "Have  you not 
found anyone  other than me to ask him so that you need to ask me?" such  
learned  men of knowledge  as Abu Al-Aliyah  Ar-Riyahi,  Ibrahim  Ibn Adham  and 
Ath-Thawri  used to deliver  their talks to two, three or a very few number  of137
a certain
to (the fire of) Hell." According  to Abu  
of knowledge  is him who, when asked


Page 140:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
people,  and if they increased  in number,  they  would  turn away  from  them.
(It is narrated  by Abu Dawud  and Al-Hakim  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  
that) the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "I do 
not know  whether  Uzair  was or was not a Prophet;  and I do not know  whether  
Tubba'  (of Yemen)  was or was not cursed,  and I do not know  whether  Dhul-  
Qamain  was or was not a Prophet."  Furthermore,  when  the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him"  was asked  about  the best and the worst  
places  on earth he said (according  to the narration  of Ahmad,  Al-Bazzar  on the 
authority  of Ibn Umar):  "I do not know."  He persisted  in that state until Gabriel  
came  down  to him,  whom  he asked,  thereupon  he said: "I also do not know."  He 
remained  as such until Allah Almighty  revealed  to him that the mosques  are the 
best places  as well as the markets  are the worst  places  on earth.
It is reported  that from every  ten questions  raised  to Ibn Umar  "Allah  be 
pleased  with both",  he used to give answer  only to one, and keep silent  of the 
r< maining  nine,  in contradiction  with Ibn Abbas  "Allah  be pleased  with both",  
who used to give answer  to nine and leave the remaining  one. From  amongst  
the religious  jurists,  there were those on whose  tongues  the statement  'I do 
not know'  ran more than the statement  'I do know',  including  Sufyan  Ath-  
Thawri,  Malik  Ibn Anas,  Ahmad  Ibn Hanbal,  Al-Fudail  Ibn Iyad, and Bishr  
Ibn Al-Harith.  Abd Ar-Rahman  Ibn Abu Laila said: "I've caught  up in this 
mosque  with one hundred  and twenty  from amongst  the holy companions  of 
the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  him",  and no one of them  was asked  
about a Prophetic  tradition  or a legal verdict  but that he hoped that his 
brother  should  suffice  him (in answering  it)." In other  words:  "The question  
would  be displayed  to anyone  of them,  who would  refer  it to another,  who,  in 
turn, would  refer it to a third,  and so on until it would  return  to the first (to 
answer  it)."
It is narrated  that one of the refugees  of the mosque  vestibule  was given a 
roasted  head of a calf as a gift, and although  he was in a terrible  need for food  he 
did not touch  it but passed  it on to one of his colleagues  who in turn passed  it on 
to another,  and so on until it had gone  all around  them  and finally  come  back to 
the first refugee.  Consider  then how things have changed  among  the learned  
men, in such a way that the undesirable  things have now become  desirable,  
whereas  the desirable  no longer  sought.
The avoidance  of undertaking  the responsibility  to give religious  and legal  
verdicts  is attested  by the following  narration  in which  it was said: "None  should  
give a religious  or legal verdict  to the people  barring  three:  a governor  (appointed  
by the ruler to be in charge  of the people's  affairs),  one who is commanded  (by 
the governor  to do so on his behalf),  otherwise  one who does so without  being  
asked to do it." According  to another  narration:  "It was the habit of the holy  
companions  to flee away from four things:  the imamate,  the responsibility  of 
legacies,  the deposits,  and giving religious  or legal verdicts."  According  to a 
certain  narration:  "The swiftest  among  them to give a religious  verdict  was the 
one who was the least learned  among  them;  and the most  reluctant  among  them138
I


Page 141:
Book  One:  Knowledge -----------------------------
was the most  pious  and righteous  among  them."
Therefore,  the holy companions  and their followers  "Allah  be pleased  with all 
of them" were entirely  involved  in five things: reciting  the Holy Qur'an,  
inhabiting  the mosques  (by performing  all the obligatory  prayers  in them in 
congregation),  celebrating  (the Praises  of) Allah  Almighty,  enjoining  what  is right,  
and forbidding  what  is evil. This is due to what  they heard  from the Messenger  of 
Allah "Peace  be upon him" (according  to the narration  of At-Tirmidhi  and Ibn 
Majah  on the authority  of Umm  Habibah):  "everything  said by mankind  is held  
against  him barring  three things:  enjoining  what  is right, forbidding  what is evil, 
or celebrating  (the Praises  of) Allah  Almighty."
In confirmation  to that Allah Almighty  says: " In most of their secret  talks  
there  is no good;  but if one exhorts  to a deed of charity  or justice  or conciliation  
between  men, (secrecy  is permissible):  to him who does this, seeking  the good  
pleasure  of Allah,  We shall soon give a reward  of the highest  (value)."  (An-Nisa  
114)139
A learned  man saw in a dream  one of those  endued  with sound  minds  from  
amongst  the people  of Kufah  whom  he asked:  "What  have you come to think  
about  such of legal and religious  verdicts  as you used to give?"  he turned  his face 
with sigh away  from  him, and then he said: "We have found  it of no significance,  
nor have  we admired  its outcome."
According  to Ibn Hussain:  "Anyone  of those  (modern  jurists)  gives  a religious  
verdict  in a case, even though  had it been raised to Umar  Ibn Al-Khattab,  he 
would  have gathered  all the people  of Badr (holy batde)  for consultation  about  
it." In this way, keeping  silence has remained  the habit of the people  of 
knowledge,  unless  they are forced  by necessity  to talk. According  to the following  
tradition  (by Ibn Majah  on the authority  of Ibn Khallad):  "When  you see a man  
having  been  given  to silence  and abstinence,  approach  him, for indeed,  he would  
dictate  wisdom  to you."
It is said: "There  are two kinds of learned  men: a public  learned  men, who  
intrudes  to give religious  and legal opinions,  and they are the companions  of the 
magistrates;  and a pre-eminent  learned  men,  who is well-versed  in the sciences  of 
monotheism  and the deeds  of hearts,  and they are those  who spend  their lives in 
privacy  of oratories  throughout  the world.
It was said that the example  of Ahmad  Ibn Hanbal  was like the example  of 
Tigris,  from which  everyone  could  get water,  and the example  of Bishr  Ibn Al- 
Harith  was like the example  of a covered  well of fresh water,  which  one after  
another  would  aim." They  also used to say: "So and so is a learned  man, so and 
so is a theologian,  so and so is a theologian  of greater  rank,  and so and so is more  
practical  in doing deeds."  According  to Abu Sulaiman:  "Knowledge  is much  
closer to keeping  silence  than it is to talking."  It was said: "The more one 
increases  in knowledge  the lesser  he speaks,  and the more  he speaks,  the lesser  he 
has knowledge."


Page 142:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
It is narrated  that Salman  sent a letter  to Abu Ad-Darda'  "Allah  be pleased  
with both",  and a bond  of brotherhood  was established  between  them  by the 
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him",  in which  he said: "O my brother!  
I've received  the news that you betook  yourself  to medicine  to treat the 
people.  Consider  then: if you are really a physician,  then talk to them, for 
indeed  your speech  to them  is a source  of healing,  otherwise,  if you are only a 
practitioner,  I beseech  you by Allah to beware of killing a Muslim."  
Afterwards,  Abu Ad-Darda'  stopped  from giving any medical  treatment.  
Furthermore,  whenever  Anas was asked about  anything,  he would  say: "Ask  
our chief  Al-Hassan."  Similarly,  whenever  Ibn Abbas  "Allah  be pleased  with  
both"  was asked  about  anything,  he said: "Ask Zaid Ibn Harithah  about  it." 
Ibn Umar  "Allah  be pleased  with both"  said, when  asked  about  anything:  "Ask  
Sa'id Ibn Al-Musayyab."
It is narrated  that one of the companions  related  twenty  Prophetic  traditions  
in the presence  of Al-Hassan,  and when  he was asked  about  their interpretation  
he said: "I do not know more than what I've related  to you." Al-Hassan  then  
went  on interpreting  them  one by one thereupon  they were surprised  by his good  
interpretation  and retention  of narrations.  On that this companions  picked  up a 
handful  of pebbles  and threw it at them and said: "Do you ask me about  
knowledge,  and this encyclopedist  lives among  you?"
Another  one of those  characteristics  is that he should  be mainly  concerned  
with the esoteric  science,  the observation  of the hearts,  and the knowledge  of and 
following  the way to the hereafter,  with a sincere  hope for uncovering  the veil of 
that through  self-mortification  and observation,  for self-mortification  leads to 
contemplation,  and through  the subtle  details  of the sciences  of the hearts  the 
sources  of wisdom  gush forth.  But books  and learning  do nothing  of significance  
for the wisdom  which  is beyond  the limit  of one's mind  are opened  only through  
self-mortification  and observation,  practicing  both outward  and inward  deeds,  
coming  before  Allah  Almighty  in solitude,  in the presence  of the heart  with pure  
reflection,  and full devotion  to Allah  Almighty,  and not to anything  else. This is 
the key of inspiration  and the source  of disclosure  and revelation
Many are the learners,  who spend  a long time of their lives in learning,  
even though  they could  by no means  go beyond  what they have heard even  
with a word;  and many  are those  who are exclusive  in their learning  only to 
what is important,  and at the same time, they devote  themselves  to the 
practice  of deeds  and observation  of the heart,  to whom  Allah  Almighty  has 
opened  such of niceties  of wisdom  as puzzle  these of sound  minds.  For this 
reason (it is narrated  by Abu Na'im on the authority  of Anas that) the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "He, who  
acts upon  what he knows,  Allah  Almighty  provides  him with the knowledge  
of what  he knows  not."
According  to one of the ancient  Scriptures  (Allah says): "O children  of 
Israel!  Say not that the knowledge  is in the heaven,  and who would  bring  it to 
the earth,  nor that the knowledge  is in the farthest  ends of the earth,  and who140


Page 143:
Book  One:  Knowledge
would  raise it up to the heaven,  nor that the knowledge  is behind  the seas, and 
who then would  cross  with it! You should  know  that knowledge  is made  to lie 
in your hearts.  So, educate  yourselves  before  Me with the education  of the 
spiritualists,  and let your manners  be the same of the truly faithful  believers,  
perchance  I would  cause  knowledge  to appear  in your  hearts  until  it cover  and 
surround  you."
According  to Sahl Ibn Abdullah  At-Tastari:  "The learned  men, worshippers  
and abstinent  have disappeared  from this world  (by death),  with their hearts  still 
closed,  and only the hearts  of the truly faithful  believers  and martyrs  have been  
opened."  Then,  he recited  the following  statement  of Allah Almighty:  " With  
Him are the keys of the Unseen,  the treasures  that none knows  but He. He 
knows  whatever  there  is on the earth  and in the sea." (Al-An'am  59)
Had it not been for the fact that the exoteric  science  is judged  in accordance  
with the enlightenment  of the heart  of him who has a sound  heart  with the help  
of the innermost  light, the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon him" would  not have said: "Seek  the guidance  of your heart,  even though  
the people  give you their  verdicts,  even though  the people  give you their verdicts,  
even though  the people  give you their  verdicts."  He "Peace  be upon  him" said in 
his relating  from his Lord Almighty  (according  to the narration  unanimously  
transmitted  by tradidonists  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah):  "The servant  still 
comes  much  closer  to Me with supererogatory  deeds  until I love him, and once  I 
love him, I will be his hearing  therewith  he hears,  his sight  therewith  he sees. .."
Many are the subde meanings  and concepts  of the mysteries  of the Holy  
Qur'an  occur  in the minds  of those  who  wholeheartedly  devote  themselves  to the 
celebration  (of the Praises  of Allah Almighty)  and reflection  (of His Signs),  of 
which  the books  of the Qur'anic  interpretations  are void, and of which  even the 
well-known  commentators  of the Qur'anic  text might  be heedless.  When  they are 
disclosed  to the watchful  devotee  and is displayed  to the commentators,  they  
would  highly  appreciate  them,  considering  them the outcome  of the workings  of 
a pure heart  and the gracious  blessings  of Allah on the sound  mind which  turns  
to Him. Similarly  the science  of Revelation  and the mysteries  of the science  of 
practical  religion  as well as the subtleties  of the passing  thoughts  of the hearts  are, 
each of them,  oceans  the depths  of which  are too intense  to be perceived  and can 
be traversed  by seekers  only to the extent  to which  each of them  has been given  
the power  and helped  to do good  deeds.
In describing  such men,  Ali "Allah  be pleased  with him" said in the course  of 
a long conversation:  “The hearts  are like vessels;  the best among  them is that 
which  is the most ready to hold good. Men are of three types: divine  learned  
men, seekers  of knowledge  for the hope of salvation,  and rude ruffians  who  
follow  every  cry and are 
of knowledge  and stand not on its firm foundation.  Verily  knowledge  is better  
than wealth:  you guard wealth,  but it is knowledge  which guards  over you.141
swayed  by every  passing  wind.  They  follow  not the light


Page 144:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
Knowledge  increases  by spending  while  wealth  diminishes  therewith.  Knowledge  
is a religion  worthy  of being  admitted,  through  which  man is enabled  to submit  
his will to the will of Allah  in this life, and has kindly  words  from his fellowmen  
after his death. Knowledge  governs  but wealth  is governed.  Furthermore,  the 
benefit  of wealth  vanishes  with the loss of wealth:  many  are the wealth  hoarders  
who die (out of grief for the loss of their wealth),  even though  they are living,  
while  the learned  men survive  as long as the time lasts. ” Taking  a deep  breath  and 
pointing  to his breast,  he resumed:  “Herein  lies abundance  of knowledge,  (which  
would  have been shown)  had I found  anyone  to carry  it on. But unfortunately,  I 
find seekers  who are not entrusted,  for from amongst  them, there is he who  
exploits  religion  for worldly  benefits,  employs  the favours  of Allah  to tie up His 
saints  with yokes,  therewith  he exalts  himself  over His people;  or he who follows  
the righteous  but, for the least suspicion,  he becomes  victim of doubt and 
skepticism,  for he has no understanding  nor insight;  or he who has great  yearning  
for pleasures  and delights,  and is guilty  of indulgence,  easily  led in the ways of 
lust; or he who is lured  by the desire  to amass  wealth  and hoard  it, who follows  
his appetite  and resembles  grazing  cattle  more  than human  beings.  On my Allah!  
As such will knowledge  perish  when  its people  die. But the world  will not be 
short  of men who will support  the cause of Allah,  some openly  in public  while  
others secredy  for fear of persecution,  lest Allah's proofs and evidence  of 
existence  be nullified.  But how many  are they and where  are they?  Those  are the 
smallest  in number  but the greatest  in worth.  They  have no equals  to exist among  
men, but their ideal lies in the hearts.  Through  them Allah will preserve  the 
proofs  of His existence  until they entrust  His testament  to their successors  or 
plant its seeds in the hearts of their fellow-saints.  With their knowledge  they  
penetrated  the matter  of the truth and arrived  at the core of certainty:  they  
rendered  easy what the pampered  have deemed  inaccessible  and entertained  
themselves  with what the heedless  have feared.  They go through  this life with  
bodies,  the spirits  of which  are attached  to heaven.  They  are the saints  of Allah  
Almighty  from amongst  His people,  His trustees  and deputies  on earth,  and the 
missionaries  who summon  men to His religion. ” He then wept and said: “Oh 
how much I have longing  to see them! ” What  he mentioned  at the end is the 
description  of the learned  men of the hereafter,  the greater  part of whose  
knowledge  is obtained  through  doing deeds regularly  and persistent  self­
mortification.142
The Significance  Of Certainty
A further  characteristic  is that he should  be fundamentally  interested  in 
strengthening  the certainty  of faith,  since  the certainty  is the essential  resources  of 
faith. In this respect,  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" said (according  to the narration  of Al-Baihaqi  and Al-Khatib  on the 
authority  of Ibn Mas'ud):  "Certainty  of faith constitutes  the whole  belief."  So, the 
science  or let me say the commencements  of certainty  of faith should be 
obtained,  and then its way will be opened  to the heart.  The Messenger  of Allah


Page 145:
Book  One:  Knowledge
"Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said (according  to the narration  of Abu  
Na'im  on the authority  of Thawr  Ibn Yazid):  "You should  learn certainty  of 
faith."  It means  you should  sit in the company  of these  whose  faith is certain,  and 
listen from them to the science  of certainty  of faith, and be regular  to emulate  
them,  in order  that your certainty  should  be constantly  strengthened  as theirs  has 
been;  and of a surety,  a little certainty  of faith (one obtains)  is much  better  than  
more  deeds  (one does).
(It is narrated  by At-Tirmidhi  on the authority  of Anas that) the Messenger  
of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said, in reply  to a question  
about two persons,  one of whom had certainty  of faith, even though  he 
committed  a great deal of sins, and the other  had striven  himself  in religious  
service,  even though  he had but a little certainty  of faith: "There  is none of 
mankind  but that he commits  sins."  But, he who has sound  mind,  and has, by 
nature,  a certainty  of faith will receive  no harm from sins, for the more he 
commits  a sin, the more he turns to Allah in repentance,  ask for His 
Forgiveness,  and shows  regret  with the result  that his sins will be plotted  out 
of him, and there will remain  surplus  good deeds therewith  he will enter the 
Garden.
So, the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said:  
"The things  of which  you have been given  the least portion  are the certainty  of 
faith and the resolution  of patience.  So, he, who has been given  his due portion  
of both should not mind how much he misses of standing  at night (for 
supererogatory  prayers)  and observing  fasts by the day."
According  to the Luqman's  counsel  to his son: "O my son! The deed could  
not be achieved  but through  one's certainty  of faith,  and one could  not do deeds  
but as much  as is equal  to such certainty  of faith as he has, and a worker  would  
not run short  of doing  deeds  unless  his certainty  of faith decreases."  According  to 
Yahya  Ibn Mu'adh:  "Verily,  monotheism  brings  about  light (in reference  to the 
certainty  of faith), and polytheism  brings about fire, but even, the light of 
monotheism  is much  stronger  in burning  the evil deeds  of monotheists  than the 
fire of polytheism  is to the good deeds of polytheists."  Allah Almighty  makes  
many  references  to those  who have the assurance  of faith in the Holy Qur'an,  
which  indicate  that it is the certainty  of faith which  joins all kinds of goodness  
and happiness.
But, you might  say: What  is the certainty  of faith?  What  do you mean  by its 
strength  and weakness?  One then should  understand  it first, and then be engaged  
in seeking  after and learning  it, since  what is not really  understood  could  not be 
sought.
It should  be known  that the term 'certainty'  is a homonymous  word used by 
two opposing  factions,  to have two different  applications.
The first application  relates  to philosophers  and theologians,  who express  by 
it the absence  of suspicion,  since the soul's  inclination  to have trust in anything  
has four stations:
The first is that both belying  and trusting  become  equal,  and this is expressed143


Page 146:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
by doubt,  and its example  is to be asked  about  a certain  person,  whether  he will 
or will not be punished  by Allah  Almighty,  and since  his state is unknown  to you,  
you will not be inclined  to pass a judgment  either  in the affirmative  or in the 
negative:  on the contrary,  both possibilities  become  even  in your sight;  and this is 
called  'doubt'.
The second  is that you are inclined  to one of both probabilities,  putting  in 
mind that its opposition  is possible,  even though  it does not prevent  you from  
giving  preference  to the former.  The example  of that is your  being  asked  about  a 
certain  man famous  for his righteousness  and piety:  if he dies while  being  on such  
a state,  should  he be punished?  However,  you are more  inclined  to the possibility  
that he will not be punished  than it is to the possibility  of punishment,  in view of 
the fact that the signs of righteous  and piety are visible  on him. But at the same  
time, there is possibility,  in your sight, for a hidden  thing in his innermost  
intention  which  might  assure  his punishment.  This latter possibility  is equal to 
that former  inclination,  but it does not cancel  out its being  more  likely.  This state  
is called ' conjecture'.
The third  is that one is more  inclined  to make  belief  of a matter,  to which  he is 
taken  up, in such a way as nothing  else occurs  to the mind,  and even if it occurs  
to the mind,  the soul will not accept  it, but with no certain  knowledge  of its truth,  
for if he would  only examine  more carefully  doubt  and conjecture,  he would  
more readily admit other possibilities.  Such a state is described  as a belief  
approaching  certainty  of faith,  and it is the belief  of the common  folk in all legal  
matters,  that becomes  deep-rooted  in themselves  just as it is simply  hearsay.  Thus  
every  group  is certain  of the authenticity  of its own doctrine  and the infallibility  
of its own imam  or leader.  Should  any one member  of these  groups  be reminded  
of the possible  mistake  of his imam,  he would  resent  it so much  and refuse  to 
admit  that.
The fourth  is the real knowledge  obtained  through  clear evidence  and proof,  
in which  there  is no suspicion,  and no doubt  could  be imagined.  If suspicion  is 
absent  and it is impossible  to exist, this state will be described  as the certainty  of 
faith in the sight  of those.  The example  of it is that When  a wise man is asked:  “Is 
there anything  eternal  in existence? ” he will not be able to affirm  or deny the 
question  instantly  because  the eternal  is beyond  the perception  of senses  unlike,  
say, the sun and moon  whose  existence  is evidently  perceptible.  Furthermore  the 
fact that something  eternal  exists  is not axiomatic  so much  as the fact that two is 
greater  than one is axiomatic:  it is like the fact that the origination  of anything  
originated  is impossible  without  a cause,  which  is also axiomatic  but in a different  
way. It is the habit of the mind to be reluctant  to accept  spontaneously  and 
intuitively  the existence  of the eternal.  But there are some  who may hear these  
things and on such authority  accept  them without  question,  and continue  to 
believe  them.  This is the same belief  of all the common  folk. There  are others  
who believe  only through  evidence.  These  are told that if nothing  eternal  exists  
then all existing  things  are originated;  and if all existing  things  are originated  then  
they are originated  without  a cause,  or some of them are so originated,  all of144
:


Page 147:
Book  One: Knowledge
which is impossible  and what leads to the impossible  is itself impossible.  
Therefore,  out of sheer necessity,  the mind is compelled  to believe  in the 
existence  of something  eternal.  For there  are only three  positions:  that all existing  
things  are eternal;  that all are originated;  that some are eternal  and some are 
originated.  If all are eternal  the question  will have  been  answered  since  all are held  
to the eternal.  But if all are originated  we shall have to accept  the impossible,  
namely  origination  without  a cause.  Consequendy  the third and first positions  
established.  Every  kind of knowledge  thus obtained  is called  certainty,  whether  it 
has been obtained  through  reasoning  such as that above,  or through  the mind  
instinctively,  as the impossibility  of any originated  existence  without  a cause,  or 
through tradition,  as the knowledge  that Mecca exists, or through  
experimentation,  such as our knowledge  that cooked  scammony  is a laxative,  or 
through  some  evidence,  as we have already  stated.  Both the philosophers  and the 
scholastic  theologians  require  the lack of doubt  before  they use this term. Every  
part of knowledge  which is free from doubt  is called certainty.  Henceforth,  
certainty  is never  described  with weakness  because  there are no degrees  in the 
negation  of doubt.
The second  application  of the term 'certainty'  is that of the jurists,  Sufis,  
and most  of the learned  men. In it, no attention  is paid to either  conjecture  or 
doubt  but rather  to the fact that it takes hold of and prevails  over the mind  in 
such a way as to say that so and so has but a little faith in death,  although  
there is no doubt  in it, and another  has a strong  faith that he receives  his 
livelihood,  although  it is quite possible  that it will never  come.  Thus  whenever  
the soul is inclined  to the acceptance  of anything  which  prevails  over the heart  
and takes hold of it, and as a result  becomes  the ruler and dispenser  of the 
soul either  by urging  it to action  or by forbidding  therefrom,  such a thing  is 
called  certainty  of faith.
Undoubtedly  all men share the certainty  of death and entertain  not the 
slightest  doubt  regarding  its proximity  but there are some  among  them who do 
not take heed of its approach  nor prepare  for its advent  as if they were not sure  
of it. Others  are so obsessed  by the fear of death  that they have directed  all their  
attention  towards  preparation  for it, leaving  thereby  no room for anything  else.  
Such  a state is described  as strength  of certainty  of faith. For this 
said: “I have seen nothing  so certain  in which there is no doubt,  similar  to 
suspicion  in which  there is no certainty  as death.”  Based  upon that, within  the 
framework  of this terminology  certainty  of faith may be described  either  with  
strength  or with weakness.  When  we said that the learned  men of the hereafter  
direct  their main attention  to strengthen  the certainty  of faith, we had in mind  
both meanings,  namely  the negation  of doubt,  i.e. certainty  of faith and give full 
power  and control  to the certainty  over the soul until it becomes  the dominant  
and ruler  over  it and only dispenser  of its affairs.
Understanding  this, you will come to know  what  we mean  when  we say that 
certainty  of faith may be divided  into three different  fashions,  in relation  to 
strength  and weakness,  muchness  and littleness,  and clearness  and vagueness.145
are
reason  someone


Page 148:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 146
applied  to the second  technical  
meaning  of certainty  of faith,  in so far as faith prevails  over and takes hold of 
the heart.  The degrees  of faith in respect  to strength  and weakness  are beyond  
limit, and the extent to which people will prepare  for death varies in 
accordance  with the difference  of their certainty  of faith in regard  to both  
terms.  The variation  of the degrees  of clearness  and vagueness  within  the 
framework  of the first technical  application  of the term certainty  cannot  be 
denied.  As far as conjecture  is concerned,  it also could  not be denied,  within  
the framework  of the second  application  of the term.  There  is also no way for 
the existence  of these  varying  degrees  of clearness  and vagueness  to be denied  
where  doubt  has been dispelled.  For example  you can readily  understandAs to strength  and weakness  they are
even
that there  is a difference  between  your trust  in the existence  of Mecca  and that  
of Fadak,  or between  your trust  in the historicity  of Moses  and that of Joshua,  
although  you have no doubt in either because  the authority  for both is 
tradition.  But the one is clearer  and more  vivid in your mind than the other,  
because  its evidence  is greater  since it was mentioned  by more  historians  and
narrators.
The same is true of the philosopher  in connection  with any theory  reached  
through  deduction,  because  what  he construes  through  the evidence  of one proof  
is not as clear  in his mind  as that which  he deduces  through  the evidence  of many  
proofs,  although  both are equal in the negation  of doubt.  This is sometimes  
denied  by the scholastic  theologian  who draws  his knowledge  from books  and 
hearsay  sources  and does not reflect  what he already  knows regarding  the 
variations  in those  states.
As to littleness  and muchness  they are subject  to the appurtenances  of 
certainty.  For example  a person ’s knowledge  may be described  as much  greater  
than that of another  which means that the amount  of information  he has 
received  is much greater.  For this reason  the learned  man may be of strong  
assurance  (i.e. he has full knowledge)  of all the contents  of the law or only of a 
part of it.
But, you might  say that you have understood  'certainty  of faith',  in relation  to 
its strength  and weakness,  muchness  and littleness,  and clearness  and vagueness  
in both its meanings  of the negation  of doubt  as well as of taking  hold of the 
heart, and ask what its appurtenance  comprise,  what the means  whereby  it is 
assured  are, and how it can be sought  because  unless  you know  how and where  
to seek it you cannot  assure  it.
It should  be known  to you then that what  the prophets  brought  belongs  in its 
entirety  to the means  whereby  certainty  of faith is assured.  For certainty  of faith  
is a specific  knowledge  whereas  its appurtenances  are the parts of information  
implied  in the law, and there is no hope of enumerating  them. Nonetheless,  let 
me make  a mention  of some  of those  which  constitute  the major  appurtenance.
One of those is (to have faith in the) Oneness  of Allah Almighty,  which  
means  that one sees that all things  come  only from  the primal  Causer  of causes,  
in the sense  that he then should  give no concern  to the secondary  causes  in this


Page 149:
Book  One: Knowledge
respect,  since  ail means  are seen by him to be subject  (to the will of the Causer  
of causes),  and have no power  in themselves.  If one has trust in that, he then  
will have certainty.  If, above and over his faith, the possibility  of doubt  is 
negated  from  his heart,  he will then have assurance  of one of both concepts  (i.e. 
certainty).  If, above  and over faith,  a power  prevails  over him to the extent  that 
it removes  from himself  the possibility  of satisfaction  or even dissatisfaction  
with, or the appreciation  for the secondary  causes,  and rather  he gives such  
secondary  causes  the same  position  he gives to a pen and a hand  in relation  to a 
benefactor  who signs his name,  i.e. he neither  is grateful  to the pen or the hand,  
nor does he feel anger  or pleased  with them,  but rather  sees them as only two 
instruments  and mediums  subdued  (to be in service  of the human  being),  he 
will then have the certainty  in the other  concept  which  is the nobler,  i.e. faith,  
which  is the ensuing  fruit, spirit  and advantage  resulting  from the first state of 
certainty.
The more  man might  verify  of the fact that sun, stars,  non-living  things,  plants  
and animals,  and in total, all of the creatures,  are no more than things  subdued  
with His (Allah's)  command  in the same  way as the pen is in the hand  of a scribe,  
and that the eternal  everlasting  power  (of Allah  Almighty)  is the primal  source  of 
all things,  the more the power  of having  trust, satisfaction  and acceptance  (of 
Allah's  Will) will prevail  over his heart, and he will come to have certainty  (of 
faith),  and at the same  time, he will be free from  all feelings  of anger,  resentment,  
envy, and bad manners.  This is, to be sure, one of the gates which leads to 
certainty.
One of those also is to have confidence  of Allah's  insurance  of livelihood147
and sustenance  to all of His Creatures,  as is confirmed  by His statement:  " 
There  is no moving  creature  on earth  but its sustenance  depends  on Allah:  He 
knows  the time and place  of its definite  abode  and its temporary  deposit:  all is 
in a clear  Record."  (Hud  6)
■—= jLiij}  L$ijj 4i>i jp <4 o* ^
It is to be sure that this will come  to him, and that what  is doomed  to him 
will inevitably  be brought  to him. The more this fact prevails  over his heart,  
the more he will be moderate  in its pursuit,  and the farther  he will be from  
greediness,  yearning  and heartbreaking  for what escapes  him. Therefore,  this 
certainty  will lead to many  good  deeds  and praiseworthy
Another  one of those  is to be possessed  by the faith in the fact that 'he who  
does even the atom's  weight  of good will see it, and he who does the atom  s 
weight  of evil will see it." (A2-Zab:alah  7:8)
i O J°ji cr*3 Jt>y ’5=^“ V* S**-*  o*3 ^
it is to have certain  faith in both reward  and punishment  in the sense  that he 
sees the obedience  (through  good  works)  relates  to reward  in the same  way as the 
bread  relates  to satiety,  and that disobedience  (through  committing  sins) relates  to 
punishment  in the same way as poison and venomous  vipers relate tomanners.


Page 150:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
destruction.  As well as he is eager to earn bread to keep himself  satisfied,  and 
store it no matter  little or much  it might  be, he should  also be eager to do all 
(good works  of worship  leading  to) obedience,  no matter  litde or much they  
might  be; and as well as he avoids  all poisons,  no matter  little or much  its amount  
might  be, he should  similarly  avoid  all (sins which  lead to)disobedience,  no matter  
little or much  they might  be, no matter  insignificant  or significant  they might  be.
However,  it is true that the certainty  in its first concept  might  be a general  
characteristic  of almost  all the believers,  its second  application  (i.e. the true faith)  
is unique  only to those  who are brought  near (to Allah  Almighty).  The fruits of 
this certainty  are the true observation  of the heart in its movement,  tranquillity,  
and passing  thoughts,  as well as extreme  emphasis  on piety and great endeavour  
to avoid all evils. The more the faith prevails  (in the heart),  the stronger  the 
avoidance  (of sins) and the stronger  the endeavour  (to do so) are.
One of those  also is the true faith in the fact that Allah  Almighty  watches  over  
you in all of your  states,  and sees all the secret  suggestions  of your  conscience  and 
your hidden  passing  thoughts  and ideas.  This fact is assured  to all the believers  in 
accordance  with the first concept,  i.e. the negation  of doubt.  But as for the 
second  concept  (i.e. the faith),  which  is intended  here,  it is a rare meaning,  which  
none  perceives  but the sincere  and truthful.  Its fruit is that one in his seclusion  is 
courteous  and well-manners  under  all conditions  as a man in audience  with an 
exalted  king. He fixes his eyes on the king and sits before  him in silence,  showing  
politeness  in all his doings  and carefully  refraining  from the slightest  thing  which  
may violate  etiquette.  His inward  thoughts  should  by no means  contradict  his 
outward  deeds  because  he will realize  that Allah  watches  over his inner  life just as 
men watch  his outward  behaviour.  Thus,  his endeavour  to cleanse  and purify  his 
inner  life in order  to make  it alluring  to the encompassing  Sight  of Allah should  
be greater  than his to make  his outward  behaviour  alluring  to men. This state of 
faith breeds  shyness,  fear, meekness,  humility,  submission,  and obedience,  as well  
as other  praiseworthy  qualities;  and these  praiseworthy  qualities  bring  about  many  
supreme  good  works.
Certainty  in each of those  is like a tree, and these  good qualities  of the heart  
are like the branches  that shoot  out from it. This good works  of worship  which  
result  from  those  good  qualities  are like the fruits  and blossoms  which  sprout  out 
from the branches.  However,  certainty  of faith is the primal origin and 
foundation,  and it has so many  means  therewith  it is obtained,  and doors  which  
lead to it, greater  in number  than what  we've  mentioned,  which  will be discussed  
in more detail  in the quarter  of the savors,  Allah Willing.  But, let's be satisfied  
now  with this amount  for the explanation  of the meaning  of the term.
One of those characteristics  which  distinguish  the learned  man is that he 
should  be sad, submissive,  fixing  his eyes in silence  on what is in front of him,  
having  the effect and signs of the fear of Allah and piety be visible  on his 
appearance,  clothing,  poise, movement,  stillness,  speech  and silence,  in such a 
way that none looks at him but that he is reminded  of Allah  Almighty,  and his 
form points out to him his deed. It is well-known  that the eye of generous148


Page 151:
Book  One: Knowledge  
honourable  acts as a mirror  on which  his soul is reflected,  and the learned  men of 
the hereafter  are famous  for their signs of tranquillity,  lowliness,  and humility.  In 
this respect,  it is said: "Allah  never  dresses  any servant  in a dress much better  
than that of submission  with tranquillity:  it is the dress of the Prophets,  and the 
sign which  distinguishes  the righteous  men,  saints  and learned  men of knowledge.
But even, to be involved  in chatter  and prate and possessed  by 
laughter,  temper  and flippancy  are all the outcome  of a life of smugness  in which  
man feels safe, and becomes  heedless  of Allah ’s terrible  punishment  and great  
wrath.  It is the practice  of these of this world  who are heedless  of Allah  unlike  
that of the learned  men, because,  as At-Tastari  said: “The learned  men are of 
three kinds.  The first kind are those  who know  the commandments  of Allah  but 
not the Days  of Allah;  they are these  who give their  decisions  as to what  is lawful  
and what  is unlawful.  This knowledge  does not bring  about  fear. The second  are 
those  who know  Allah but not His Commandments  nor His Days;  and they are 
the ordinary  believers.  The third are those who know Allah as well as His 
commandments  and Days; and they are the saints in whose  hearts fear and 
humility  prevail.”  By the Days of Allah he means the unknown  punishments  
which  Allah  inflicted  and His hidden  blessings  which  He bestowed  upon  the early  
generations,  and which  He will also visit upon  the succeeding  generations.  Thus,  
anyone  whose  knowledge  encompasses  this, his fear of Allah  would  be stronger  
and his humility  would  be more  evident.
According  to Umar  "Allah  be pleased  with him": "Learn  knowledge,  and 
observe  tranquillity,  reverence  and tolerance  for knowledge,  and behave  
humbly  towards  those from whom  you learn, and let those who learn from  
you behave  humbly  towards  you; and be not of the haughty  among  the 
learned  men,  lest your knowledge  would  vanish  because  of your  ignorance."  It 
is said: "Allah  never  confers  knowledge  upon  a servant  but that He gives him 
besides  tolerance,  humbleness,  good disposition  and kindness:  this is the 
useful  knowledge."
According  to the following  tradition  it is said: "He whom Allah gives  
knowledge,  (a tendency  to) asceticism,  humbleness,  and good manners,  will be a 
leading  pious."  According  to another  Prophetic  tradition  (transmitted  by Al- 
Hakim  and Al-Baihaqi  on the authority  of Iyad Ibn Sulaiman):  "From  amongst  
my nation,  there  are a people,  who laugh  publicly  because  of (their  happiness  and 
satisfaction  with) Allah's  all-embracing  mercy,  and weep secredy  because  of their  
fear of Allah's  punishment.  They  live with their bodies  on earth,  and their  hearts  
up in the heaven,  their souls in this world,  and their minds  are attached  to the 
hereafter.  They  walk with tranquillity,  and come  close (to the Presence  of Allah)  
by means  of access  (of invocation  and celebration  of His Praises).
According  to Al-Hassan:  "Tolerance  acts as the minister  of knowledge,  
leniency  its father and humbleness  its garment."  According  to Bishr Ibn Al- 
Harith:  "He, who seeks after power  through  knowledge,  and draws  
Allah Almighty  with his heart full of hatred,  will be odious  in (the sight of the 
inhabitants  of) both the heaven  and the earth."  It is narrated  in the Israeli  tales149
excessive
near unto


Page 152:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
that a man made three hundred  and sixty compositions  in wisdom  until he was 
described  as a wise man. But Allah  revealed  to His Prophet:  "Tell so and so that 
you have filled the earth with hypocrisy  (of your compositions)  and you've  
intended  Me with anything  of that. So, I never accept anything  of your  
hypocrisy."  Thereupon  the man regretted  and gave up his work,  and rather  went  
associating  with the laymen  in the markets,  shared  food with the children  of 
Israel,  and showed  humbleness  in himself.  On that Allah Almighty  revealed  to 
His Prophet:  "Tell so and so that it is now that you've  become  fitting  for My 
Good  Pleasure."
It is narrated  by Al-Awza'i  that Sa'd Ibn Bilal said: "Anyone  of you might  
cast a glance  at a policeman,  and seek refuge  with Allah from his evil; and he 
might  catch a glimpse  of one of the learned  men of this world,  who flatters  
the people  and are longing  for power,  and he does not bother  him, even  
though  such are worthier  of being detested  from that policeman."  It is 
narrated  (on the authority  of AJ-Hassan)  that it was said: "O Messenger  of 
Allah!  Which  deed is the best?"  he "Peace  be upon him" said: "It is to avoid  
taboos,  and to cease not from the celebration  of (the Praises  of) Allah  
Almighty."  It was further  said: "O Messenger  of Allah!  Which  companion  is 
good?"  he "Peace  be upon him" said: "The one who,  whenever  you celebrate  
Allah,  will encourage  you, and whenever  you forget  Him will remind  you." It 
was said to him: "Then,  which  of the companions  is evil?"  he "Peace  be upon  
him" said: "He who, whenever  you forget (to remember  Allah) will not 
remind  you, and whenever  you celebrate  Him will not encourage  you. It was 
said: "Which  of the people  is the most  learned?"  he "Peace  be upon  him" said:  
"He who fears Allah  most  among  them."  It was said: "Tell  us about  the good  
among  us, perchance  we might sit in their company."  He "Peace  be upon  
him" said: "Those  who,  whenever  they're  seen, Allah  is remembered."  It was 
said: "Which  of the people  is evil?" he said: "O Allah! I ask You for 
forgiveness!"  they said: "Tell us O Messenger  of Allah!"  on that he "Peace  be 
upon  him" said: "They  are the learned  men when  they become  dishonest."
(It is narrated  that) the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon him" said: "From  amongst  the people,  he who will be the safest in the 
hereafter  is he, who used to be the most  apprehensive  in this world,  and he who  
will laugh  most  in the hereafter  is he, who used to weep  most  in this world,  and 
he who will be the happiest  in the hereafter  is he, who used to be the saddest  in 
this world."
It is narrated  that Ah "Allah  be pleased  with him" said in one of his sermons:  
“My conscience  is pledged  to Allah even though  I pretend  that no crops of 
anyone  will wither  if they were planted  with piety,  nor will the roots of any tree 
be dry if it were raised  with righteousness.  The most  ignorant  man is he who has 
picked  up haphazardly  tidbits  of knowledge  which  carried  him into the darkness  
of sin, yet despite  this and despite  the fact that he has not spent  a single  day in 
study,  he has been  called  learned  by disreputable  and evil men. He would  go after  
quantity  not knowing  that little knowledge  of the right kind is better  than a great150
not
on


Page 153:
Book  One: Knowledge  
deal of it which diverts  man from Allah. He would  drink, as it were, from  
stagnant  and stale water  and be engaged  in diverse  activities  but of no use. Then  
he would  sit down  to teach men and to explain  to them what is obscure.  If he 
would be confronted  with a weighty  problem  he would relate a wordy  and 
redundant  opinion  which,  rather than remove  all ambiguity,  would put the 
inquirer  to a mess of confusion  similar  to a cobweb,  and would  so baffle  him as 
to make  it impossible  for him to determine  whether  the man is right or wrong.  
He is rooted  in ignorance  and is the victim  of diabolical  madness.  He will 
decline  to answer  that which  he does not know  and thus avoid  error,  nor will he 
strive to gain a strong  hold on knowledge  that through  its mastery  he may  
prosper.  Through  his ignorance  blood  is shed,  and through  his juridical  opinions  
unlawful  adultery  is rendered  lawful.  He is not capable  of dispensing  with the 
problems  which  have been submitted  to him and is not equal to the task which  
has been delegated  to his care. On such men should  fall the worst  punishment;  
they should  bewail  and lament  their fate while  they live.”  Ali resumed:  “Abide  by 
knowledge  when  you hear  it, and mix it not with jesting  lest it be bothered. ”
One of the predecessors  said: "When  a learned  man laughs  even  once  jestingly  
because  of knowledge,  his knowledge  is negatively  affected."  It was also said: “If 
the teacher  possesses  three characteristics,  the learner  portion  will be perfect:  
patience,  humility,  and good nature; and if the learner possesses  three  
characteristics,  the teacher ’s portion  will be perfect:  intelligence,  good manners  
and earnest  understanding. ”
In total, the learned  men of the hereafter  always  possess  the qualities  which  
the Qur ’an mentions  because  they study  the Qur ’an in order  to act upon  it and 
not to take power  and prestige.
In this respect,  (it is narrated  by Al-Hakim  and Al-Baihaqi  that) Ibn Umar  
"Allah  be pleased  with both" said: “For a short period  of time we were in the 
habit  of being  instructed  in the principles  of faith before  the Qur ’an. Whenever  a 
Surah  was revealed  we would  learn the lawful  things  it enjoined  and the unlawful  
things  it forbade,  its commandments  and its prohibitions,  and those things  at 
which  we had to stop. But I have also seen men who master  the text of the 
Qur ’an before  learning  the principles  of faith. They  would  recite  the Qur ’an from  
the beginning  to the end, but even they would  not know  what  it commands  and 
what  it prohibits,  nor would  they have acquaintance  with those things  at which  
one should  stop. They  would  handle  these things  and toss them about  as if they  
were the worst  kind of dates. ”
According  to another  tradition  (by Ibn Majah  on the authority  of Jundub)  the 
similar  idea is expressed  as follows:  “We, the Companions  of the Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him",  we were in the habit of being  
instructed  in the principles  of faith before  the Qur ’an; but after you, there will 
come  people  who will master  the text of the Qur ’an before  being  well-acquainted  
with the principles  of faith: they will be perfect  in reciting  it according  to the 
different  ways in which  it was revealed,  but at the same time, they will ignore  its 
precepts  and commandments.  They  will say: 'We recite  the Qur ’an perfectly:  who151
not


Page 154:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
could recite  it better  than us? We have perfect  knowledge  of it: who has better  
knowledge  of it than us?' This shall be their share ” or According  to another  
narration:  “Those  are the worst  of this nation. ”
It is said that five merits  deduced  from five Holy  verses  in the Book  of Allah  
Almighty  are characteristic  of the learned  men of the hereafter.  These  merits  are 
the fear of Allah, submission,  humbleness,  good disposition,  and giving  
preference  to the hereafter  over this world,  i.e. asceticism.
The fear of Allah is deduced  from His statement:  "Those  truly fear Allah,  
among  His Servants,  who have  knowledge."  (Fatir  28)
4 © Cr! >
the merit of submission  is understood  from Allah's  statement:  " bowing  in 
humility  to Allah:  they will not sell the Signs of Allah for a miserable  gain! for 
them  is a reward  with their  Lord,  and Allah  is swift  in account."  (A1 Imran  199)
i llli &\ oJli*  ojXm y & }
That  of humbleness  is taken  from  the statement  of Allah  Almighty:  "but lower  
your  wing  (in gentleness)  to the Believers."  (Al-Hijr  88)152
The quality  of good  disposition  is learnt  from  the saying  of Allah  Almighty:  
"It is part of the Mercy  of Allah that you do deal gently  with them.  Wert you 
severe  or harsh-hearted,  they would  have broken  away from about  you." (A1 
Imran  159)
The virtue  of asceticism  is inferred  from the statement  of Allah Almighty:  " 
But those who had been granted  (true) knowledge  said: "Alas for you! The  
reward  of Allah (in the Hereafter)  is best for those who believe  and work  
righteousness:  but this none shall attain,  save those  who steadfastly  persevere  (in 
good).""  (Al-Qasas  80)
4 ^^y  fV* \y^ £
(It is narrated  by Al-Hakim  and Al-Baihaqi  on the authority  of Ibn Mas'ud  
that) when  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him"  
recited  the following  statement  of Allah Almighty:  " Those  whom  Allah (in 
His plan) wills to guide,  He opens  their breast  to Islam;  those  whom  He wills  
to leave  straying,  He makes  their  breast  close  and constricted"  (Al-An'am  125)
4 dpVi  0* 2^ *y. }
It was said to him: "What  is the meaning  of opening  the breast?"  he "Peace  
be upon him" said: "When  the light (of faith) is inspired  into the heart,  the 
breast  opens  to it and becomes  too spacious  (for it to enter)."  It was further  
said: "Is there any sign characteristic  of that?"  he "Allah's  blessing  and peace


Page 155:
Book  One: Knowledge
be upon  him said: Yes: to desert  the abode  of arrogance  (i.e. this world  with  
its vanities),  to return  to the abode  of eternity,  and get ready  for death  before  
it comes."
One of those characteristics  which distinguishes  a learned  man is to 
direct the most part of his search  and study to the science  of deeds:  what  
damages  them,  puzzles  the hearts,  arouse  suspicions,  and give rise to evil. To 
be sure, the foundation  on which religion  is mainly  based is to safeguard  
oneself  from evil. For this reason,  it is said (in a form of poetic  verses):  "I've  
known  evil, not for the sake of evil but for the purpose  to safeguard  myself  
from it. That's  because  such of people  as does not really know evil should  
inevitably  fall into it."
However,  the actual  deeds  are within  the reach  of all, and the most  significant,  
if not the highest  of them is the regular  celebration  of (the Praises  of) Allah  
Almighty  with both heart  and tongue.  The main  point  is to be well-aware  of what  
corrupts  and distorts  them,  a science  whose  branches  and divisions  are various,  
and their discussion  is very lengthy.  Nevertheless  there is urgent  need for all of 
that, because  of which  one might  be put to distress  and trial during  his journey  
on the way to the hereafter.
On the other hand, the learned  men of this world always  pursue  the hair­
splitting  and rare cases in judgements  and verdicts,  and trouble  themselves  in 
bringing  hypothetical  forms  which  might  hardly  occur  along  so many  generations,  
and even in case of their occurrence,  they would  occur  to a people  other than  
them, and there would be as many as are capable  of confronting  them.  
Nonetheless,  they leave such of pressing  problems  as haunt them repeatedly  
during  night and day, in their passing  thoughts,  whispers,  and deeds.  How far 
removed  from happiness  is the one who sells his own important  and necessary  
concerns  for insignificant  even though  unnecessary  concerns  of others,  giving  
preference  to winning  the nearness  and approval  of the people  over those of 
Allah Almighty,  and still worse  it is that such is described  by the reprobates  of 
this world as a virtuous  learned  man, who is knowledgeable  of the subde  
sciences.  But the reward  he receives  from Allah Almighty  is that he never  get 
benefit  from the acceptance  of the people  in this world:  on the contrary,  his 
happiness  is overshadowed  with distresses  and misfortunes,  and on the Day of 
Judgement,  he will come  bankrupt  (of good deeds)  and sad in grief for what he 
will see of the profit  of the doers  of good  deeds  and the success  of those  who are 
made  near to Allah  Almighty;  and to be sure, this will be the evident  loss for him.
Al-Hassan  "Might  Allah bestow  mercy upon him" was, according  to the 
unanimity  of men,  from  amongst  the people  the most  similar  in his speech  to the 
Prophets  and Messengers  "Peace  be upon all of them",  and the nearest  to the 
right guidance  of the holy companions  "Allah  be pleased  with them".  The most  
part of his speech  was mainly  focused  upon the passing  thoughts  of hearts,  the 
acts which  corrupt  deeds,  the evil suggestions  of souls,  and the innermost  hidden  
abstruse  traits which  characterize  the lusts. One day it was said to him: "O Abu  
Sa'id! You say things  which  are153
never  heard  from anyone  else: from where  have


Page 156:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
you got them?"  he said: "From Hudhaifah  Ibn Al-Yaman."  It was said to 
Hudhaifah:  "We see that you say things  which  are never  heard  from anyone  of 
the holy companions:  from where  have you got them?"  he said: "Verily,  the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" favoured  me with  
them.  The people  used to ask him about  good,  but I asked him about  evil, for 
fear I might  fall in it, seeing  that the knowledge  of good  would  not escape  me" or 
in other words  "Ajid I came to know that he who had no knowledge  of evil 
would  have  no knowledge  of good."
It is further  narrated  that they used to say: "O Messenger  of Allah! Which  
reward  would  be for him who does such and such?  i.e. they asked  him about  the 
meritorious  rewardable  of deeds.  But as for me, I asked  him: "O Messenger  of 
Allah!  Which  thing  would  corrupt  such and such (of deeds)?"  when  he saw that I 
continuously  asked  him about  the evil of deeds,  he favoured  me with this special  
knowledge.
Hudhaifah  "Might  Allah  bestow  mercy  upon  him" was also favoured  with the 
knowledge  of hypocrites  and the acquaintance  with hypocrisy,  its reasons  and 
subtleties  of afflictions  was unique  to him (apart from the other companions).  
Umar,  Uthman,  and the elder from among  the companions  "Allah  be pleased  
with them"  asked  him about  the public  and private  afflictions.  Whenever  he was 
asked  about  the hypocrites,  he would  tell about  the number  of such of them as 
still survived,  but without  defining  their names.  Umar "Allah  be pleased  with  
him" asked  him whether  he had, to his knowledge,  any signs  of hypocrisy,  and he 
set him free from that. Whenever  Umar "Allah be pleased  with him" was 
summoned  to a funeral  procession,  he would cast a glance:  if Hudhaifah  
attended,  he would  perform  funeral  prayer  on it, otherwise,  he would  leave it. 
Hudhaifah  "Allah  be pleased  with him"  was also called  the Man  of Secret.
Thus,  to take care of the ranks and states of the heart  is the practice  of the 
learned  men of the hereafter,  for it is the heart  which  seeks  after the nearness  of 
Allah  Almighty.  But even,  this branch  has come  to be strange,  and in short  it has 
disappeared  to the extent  that if anyone  of the learned  men addresses  himself  to 
anything  of it, he would  be rendered  odd and curious  and his efforts  would  be 
described  as the embellishments  of preachers.  How far and different  from that 
are the researches  which men now carry in the niceties  of dialectics  and 
argumentation!  The poet was right  when  he said: "Many  are the roads,  but truth  
is a single path, And how few are those who tread this way. They pass  
unrecognized,  their goal unknown,  While slowly  and steadily  they walk along.  
The people  are heedless  of what  is required  from  them,  and most  of them  are far 
from  the way of truth."
In total, the most part of the people  do not incline  but to what  is easier  and 
more convenient  to their dispositions.  Verily the truth is bitter, and if it is 
difficult  to discover  it, it is much harder  to attain it, since its way is rough,  
particularly  when  the point  is to know  the nature  of the heart,  in order  to purify  it 
from  the vicious  blameworthy  qualities.  This is as painful  as to remove  one's  soul  
continuously,  and he who pursues  it is like the person  who takes  his medicine  and154


Page 157:
Book  One: Knowledge  
keeps  patient  on its bitterness  in the hope of being  cured,  or like the man who  
fasts throughout  his life and suffers  all resulting  difficulties  in order to enjoy  
breaking  his fast at death.
Yet when  has this path be encouraging  or attractive?  For this reason  it is said 
that there  were in Basrah  one hundred  and twenty  speakers  engaged  in preaching  
and warning,  but only six were engaged  in the science  of certainty  of faith, the 
study  of the states  of the heart and the qualities  of the inner  self, including  Sahl  
At-Tastari,  As-Subaihi,  and Abd Ar-Rahim.  To the former  there always  flocked  
multitudes  of people,  while to the latter only a few which  hardly  exceeded  
came.  That's  because  valuable  and precious  things  are not fit except  for the elite,  
and what  is placed  at the disposal  of the mob is cheap.
Another  one of those  characteristics  which  a learned  man should  have is 
that he should  depend,  in the acquisition  of his knowledge,  upon  his deep insight  
and perception  with the help of his pure heart,  and not upon scripts  and books,  
nor upon the imitation  of what he hears from others,  but at the same time, he 
should  imitate  the lawgiver  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" in all of his 
commands,  sayings  and deeds,  and also the holy companions  "Allah  be pleased  
with them"  whereas  their deeds testified  that they heard knowledge  from the 
Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him".
On the other  hand,  if one emulates  the lawgiver  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon  him"  and receives  with acceptance  all of his deeds  and sayings,  he should  be 
eager to understand  their significance.  It is true that it is binding  upon the 
imitator  to do the same act done by the lawgiver  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon  him",  but it should  be known  that he did it just for a certain  significance  it 
had. For this reason,  he should  strive himself  in search  for the significance  of 
deeds  and sayings.  If one is satisfied  only  with retaining  what  is said, he will be no 
more than a container  of knowledge,  and not a learned  man, and it was 
customary  to say in this respect  about  such: "So and so is only a container  of 
knowledge,  and not a learned  man." He, who is in the habit of retaining  
information,  and lacking of acquaintance  with the items of wisdom  and 
significance  lying  behind  it, could  by no means  be described  as a learned  man of 
knowledge.  But when  one removes  the veil from his heart,  and would  allow  it to 
be flooded  with the light of guidance  he would  become  a leader  to be emulated,  
and therefore  should  not blindly  follow  the example  of others.
For this reason,  (it is narrated  by At-Tabarani)  on the authority  of Ibn Abbas  
that he "Allah  be pleased  with both" said: "There  is none (from amongst  the 
learned  people)  but that his knowledge  might  be accepted  or rejected,  barring  the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him"." He learnt  
jurisprudence  from Zaid Ibn Thabit,  and the rules of recitation  from Ubai Ibn 
Ka'b, and later on he came to differ with them in some questions  of 
jurisprudence  and rules of recitation.  According  to somebody:  We accept  
willingly  what we have received  from the Messenger  of Allah Allah  s blessing  
and peace  be upon  him",  and might  accept  or reject  what  we've  received  from  the 
holy companions  "Allah  be pleased  with them".  But as for what we've  received155
ten


Page 158:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
from the early followers,  the matter  is different,  for both them  and us are men (of 
knowledge)."
The superiority  of the holy companions  "Allah  be pleased  with them"  is due 
to the fact that they saw with their own eyes the different  states  and affairs  of the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him",  and their hearts  
attached  to things  which  they perceived  with the help of their indicators,  
which  helped  them become  right, with no transmission  nor narration  (through  
intermediaries),  since the light of Prophethood  overflowed  them to the extent  
that in most  cases  it kept them  far from  any mistake.
If the dependence  upon the hearsay sources related from others is 
unsatisfactory,  the reliance  on books  and written  compositions  should  be farther  
from the truth. That's because  the books and written  composition  was an 
innovation  which  was not customary  during  the lifetime  of the holy companions,  
and the first generation  of the early followers;  and it was not before  the year of 
one hundred  and twenty  that it came into existence,  after the death of all the 
companions,  the pioneering  followers,  after the death  of Sa'id Ibn Al-Musayyab,  
Al-Hassan,  and the best among  the early followers.  Moreover,  the early fathers  
disliked  writing  down the Prophetic  traditions  and composing  books,  lest the 
people  would be occupied  by them on the exclusion  of the retention  and 
recitation  of the Qur'an,  consideration  and celebration  (of Allah).  In this respect  
they said: "Retain  in memory  in the same  way as we did."
For this reason,  Abu Bakr and a group  of the holy companions  disliked  to 
write down the Holy Qur'an  in a Mushaf,  and said: "How  should  we do a 
thing  which  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him"  
did not?" they
Mushafs,  and said: "Let's  leave the Qur'an  to be received  from each other  by 
way of dictation  and recitation,  in order that this should  be their main  
occupation  and concern."  They  remained  as such until Umar  Ibn Al-Khattab  
and others from amongst  the companions  suggested  that the Holy Qur'an  
should  be written  down  in a Mushaf,  lest the people  would  weaken  and fail to 
retain  it, and warned  against  the possibility  of any dispute  concerning  a word  
or an ambiguous  in the absence  of any source  of reference.  The result  was 
that Abu Bakr's  breast  was expanded  to this idea which  he accepted,  and gave  
his commands  that the Qur'an  should  be gathered  in a written  form in one 
volume.
But Ahmad  Ibn Hanbal  criticized  Malik in his composing  Al-Muwatta'  (the 
Well-Trodden  Path),  saying:  "He did a new thing which  the holy companions  
"Allah  be pleased  with them"  never  did."
It is said that the first book to be composed  in Islam  is Ibn Juraij's  book of 
traditions  and ways of recitation,  which  he transmitted  from Mujahid,  Ata' and 
the companions  of Ibn Abbas  "Allah  be pleased  with both"  in Mecca,  followed  
by the book of Ma'mar  Ibn Rashid  in Yemen,  in which he gathered  many  
Prophetic  traditions  and acts of sunnah.  Then Malik Ibn Anas composed  in156
were
afraid that the people  might  put their full trust in the were


Page 159:
Book  One:  Knowledge
Medina  his book  of Muwatta'  (the Well-Trodden  Path).  Later,  Sufyan  Ath-Thawri  
composed  his Jami'.
In the fourth  century  of Hegira,  there appeared  so many compositions  in 
scholastic  theology  and the people  engaged  themselves  more  and more  in debate  
and argumentation.  They inclined  to debate  and anecdotes  and using them in 
preaching.  Consequently  the science  of certainty  of faith began  to vanish,  and the 
science  of the heart,  and the investigation  of the qualities  of the soul, and the 
study of the stratagem  of the devil became  curious  and unknown.  All barring  a 
very few ignored  them.  Then  it became  the custom  to give the name  learned  man  
to the arguing  scholastic  and the story-teller,  who embellished  his words  with  
rhymed  prose,.  This was primarily  because  laymen  made up their audience,  I 
mean  laymen  who could  not distinguish  true knowledge  from that which  is false,  
while  the acts and learning  of the Companions  were not evident  to them,  so that 
they would  be able to know how different  they were from them. These  men  
continued  to enjoy the title ‘learned*  which  they went on inheriting  from each  
other.157
At the same time the science  of the hereafter  came out of sight and the 
difference  between  knowledge  and disputation  disappeared  except from the 
private  among  them, who were still able to say, whenever  they were asked  
whether  so and so was more learned  than another,  that the former  had more  
knowledge,  while the latter was given to mere argumentation  and disputation,  
distinguishing  thereby  between  knowledge  and the ability  to dispute  and argue.  In 
this way did the science  of religion  decline  during  those  early centuries:  how then  
about  its state at the present  time?  Things  have come to a point  where  anyone  
who would  dare to show his disapproval  of the present  state of affairs  would  
become  under  the risk of being  described  as insane.  For this reason,  it is better  
for man to be engaged  in his own business  and to hold his peace.
One of those  characteristics  of a learned  man is that he should  be so much  
eager to safeguard  himself  from the innovations  in religion,  even though  they  
gain the unanimity  of the public;  and let not him be deceived  by the people's  
dependence  upon the innovations  made after the holy companions  "Allah  be 
pleased  with them".  Let him further  be extremely  eager  to search  for the different  
states,  conduct  and deeds of the holy companions,  and for the matters  which  
occupied  most  of their concern,  and whether  they diverted  their main  concern  in 
teaching,  composing  books,  argumentation  and debate,  judiciary,  the office of 
judgement,  the guardianship  of endowments  and bequests,  devouring  the wealth  
of the orphans,  associating  with the magistrates,  and flattering  them, or in the 
fear (of Allah),  sadness,  reflection,  self-mortification,  observation  of the deeds  of 
both the outward  and inward,  avoidance  of minor  as well as major  sins, eagerness  
to understand  the hidden  qualities  of the soul's  lusts,  and the stratagems  of devil,  
and the other  subjects  which  belong  to the esoteric  sciences.
It should  be known,  beyond  the shadow  of doubt,  that the greatest  learned


Page 160:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 158
and the nearest  to the truth from  amongst  those  of his time is him, who is man
the most similar  to the holy companions,  and the most knowledgeable  of the 
way which the early ancestors  followed,  from whom the principles  and 
foundations  of religion  were taken  and learnt.  For this reason,  when  it was said 
to Ali "Allah  be pleased  with him": "You've  differed  with so and so (in this 
matter  of religion)",  he said: "The best among  us if him, who stick to the 
principles  and foundations  of this religion  most  among  us." Therefore,  in order  
that one should  conform  to the inhabitants  of the time of the Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him", he should  not mind of his 
difference  with,  and contradiction  to the people  of his own time. However,  the 
people  adopt  what they do for they are inclined  by nature  to it, and since they  
are not able to admit  that it might  account  for forbidding  the Garden  to them,  
they claim that there is no way to enter the Garden  but through  that (which  
they adopt  and do).
\For this reason  Al-Hassan  said: “Two innovators  have appeared  in Islam:  A 
man of bad judgment  who alleges  that the Garden  will be the reward  only for 
those who adopt his opinions,  and a man of luxury and extravagance  who  
worships  this world  for the sake of which  he become  displeased,  and for the sake  
of which he becomes  satisfied,  and besides  which  he seeks nothing.  So, you 
should  reject  both for they  are doomed  to enter  the fire of Hell.  The average  man  
in this world  finds himself  standing  between  a sybarite  who summons  him to the 
luxuries  of this world,  and a faddist  who calls him to follow  his whim. But 
fortunately  Allah has saved  him from both. He aspires  to be like the righteous  
fathers  and inquires  about  their deeds  and follows  their footsteps,  and prepares  
himself  for a great  reward.  As such  you should  be.”
It is narrated  (by Ibn Majah)  on the authority  of Ibn Mas ‘ud with its chain  of 
transmission  going  back  to the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon  him" and according  to another  version  stopping  short  of the Messenger  of 
AJlah,  in which  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him"  
said: “Of all things,  two 
word of Allah,  and the best guidance  is the guidance  of the Messenger  of AJlah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him". Beware  of innovations  because  of all 
things,  they are the worst;  and every  innovation  is a heresy,  while  every  heresy  is a 
sin. Behold!  let not your long life harden  your hearts.  Verily  whatever  has been  
ordained  is now approaching  and whatever  has not been ordained  will not 
occur. ”!
i
best: the word and guidance.  The best word  is the are
During  his sermon,  the Messenger  of AJlah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon  him" said (according  to the narration  of Abu Na'im  on the authority  of Al- 
Hussain  Ibn Ali): “Blessed  be he whose  concern  with his own faults  occupies  him 
from  meddling  with the faults  of others,  spends  out of the money  which  he gains  
without  sin, associates  with the learned  and the wise, and shuns the people  of 
errors  and disobedience.  Blessed  be he who humbles  himself,  whose  nature  has


Page 161:
Book  One: Knowledge
been refined  and whose  heart has been reformed,  who keeps  his evil from the 
people.  Blessed  be he who acts upon  his knowledge,  who spends  the surplus  of 
his substance,  and who never  speaks  but with what  is necessary,  who lives within  
the limits of law and does not transgress  its due bounds  to bring about  
innovations. ”
Ibn Mas ‘ud used to say: “Towards  the end of time good guidance  will 
come  to be better  than doing  many  deeds. ” He resumed:  “You now live in a 
time wherein  the best among  you is he who is the swiftest  to carry  out affairs,  
but you will come  upon  a time wherein  the best will be the most  cautious  and 
deliberate  because  of the abundance  of suspicious  things. ” Really  he told the 
truth because  any one at the present  time who does not stop and think,  but 
rather  follows  the crowds  and does what they have done,  will perish  as they  
have perished.
According  to Hudhaifah  "Allah  be pleased  with him":  "More  surprising  is that 
what is accepted  in this time of yours  was rejected  in the past time (of the holy  
companions),  and what  is rejected  in this time of yours  will come  to be accepted  
in the coming  time. But even, you are good as long as you know  the truth,  and 
the learned  man among  you is not dealt  with slighdy."  However,  he has told the 
truth, for the most of what is accepted  now was rejected  during  the age of the 
holy companions.  It is accepted  now, for example,  to decorate  and furnish  the 
mosques,  and spend great deal of wealth in their ornate construction  and 
covering  them  with fine rugs.
However,  taking  carpets  in the mosque  was regarded  one of the innovations,  
and it is said that this innovation  was made  by pilgrims.  That's  because  the early  
men hardly  placed  anything  on the ground  to be between  their bodies  and the 
dust  in the prayer.
The same is true of the involvement  in the subtle details of debate  and 
argumentation,  for the service  of the sciences  of this time, claiming  that it is the 
greatest  thing  therewith  one draws  near unto Allah  Almighty,  even though  it was 
one of the rejected  things.
A mention  here might  be made  of the melodiousness  of the recitation  of both  
Qur'an  and the call for prayer  (Adhan),  transgressing  the due limits  of the matters  
of cleanliness  and being  extremely  suspicious  in matters  of ceremonial  purity,  
regarding  clothes  unclean  on petty and far-fetched  grounds,  and being lax in 
rendering  lawful  and unlawful  foods  as well as many  others  like that.
Ibn Mas'ud  "Allah  be pleased  with him" told the truth  when  he said: "You  live 
now in a time, in which  the desire  is controlled  by knowledge,  but later, a time  
will come  upon  the people,  in which  the knowledge  will be controlled  by desire."  
According  to Ahmad  Ibn Hanbal:  "They have left the real knowledge,  and 
addressed  themselves  to the amazing things:  how little knowledge  they have;  and 
Allah is the source  of help." According  to Malik Ibn Anas: "In the past, the 
people  did not ask about  those  things,  about  which  the people  at present  ask; and159


Page 162:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
the learned  men used not to describe  things  as lawful  or unlawful,  but I caught  up 
with them  while  describing  things  as desirable  and undesirable. ” This means  that 
they considered  only the extent to which things would be desirable  or 
undesirable,  just because  the sinfulness  of the unlawful  was evidendy  clear.  
According  to Hisham  Ibn Urwah:  "Ask  them  not nowadays  about  what  they have  
innovated  by themselves,  for indeed,  they've  prepared  the related  answers,  but 
rather  ask them  about  the right  way of sunnah,  for indeed,  they know  it not. ”
According  to Abu Sulaiman  Ad-Darani:  "It is not fitting for him who is 
inspired  anything  of good to do to act upon  it until he hears  its confirmation  in 
the Prophetic  traditions  thereupon  praises  Allah  Almighty  for its conformity  to 
what is within  himself. ” The reason  why he said so was that the innovations  in 
religion  have struck  the ears, and attracted  the hearts  to the extent  that it might  
bother  their purity,  and cause  one to regard  falsehood  as the truth;  and in order  
to prevent  that, such should be careful  by supporting  his inspiration  with  
evidence  from  the Prophetic  tradition.
For this reason,  when  Marwan  introduced  the pulpit  in the sanctuary  during  Id 
prayer,  Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri  stood  towards  him and said: "O Marwan!  What is 
this innovation?"  he said: "It is not an innovation.  It is better than what you 
know  and advocate.  The people  have  increased  in number,  and I wanted  that the 
voice  (of the imam)  would  reach  all of them."  On that Abu Sa'id said: "By Allah!  
You will never  bring  what  is better  than I know.  By Allah!  I will not offer  prayer  
behind  you today."  Such disapproval  of his act seemed  to have been due to the 
fact that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" used  
to recline  against  a bow or a stick during  the Id or Istisqa'  sermons,  and not 
against  the pulpit.
According  to a famous  tradition  (on the authority  of A'ishah):  "Whoever  
changes  anything  in our religion,  which  is not integral  to it, this change  should  be 
cancelled."  According  to another  narration  (by Ad-Daraqatni  on the authority  of 
Anas):  "Let the curse of Allah,  the angels  and all the people  be upon him who  
deceives  my nation."  It was said: "O Messenger  of Allah!  How does he deceive  
the nation?"  he "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "He makes  an 
innovation  (which  is not included  in the religion)  and force the people  to act 
upon it." (According  to another  narration)  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "There  is an angel  sent by Allah  to make  a 
public  announcement  everyday:  "Behold!  The intercession  of the Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" will never  extend  over anyone  
that contradicts  his sunnah."
The example  of him who transgresses  against  the religion  by making  an 
innovation  which  violates  the sunnah  in relation  to the one who only commits  a 
sin is like the example  of him who rebels  against  the king in order  to destroy  the 
government  in relation  to the one who only disobeys  him in implementing  a 
particular  command.  It is true that the sin of the latter  might  be excused,  unlike160


Page 163:
Book  One: Knowledge
him who rebels  against  the state. According  to a learned  man: "It is insolent  to 
keep silent from that which the predecessors  discussed,  as well as it is 
ostentatious  to talk in that from which  the predecessors  kept silent."  According  
to another  learned  one: "To be sure, the truth  is very heavy:  he, who goes beyond  
it commits  injustice;  and he, who runs short  of it fails; and he, who aligns  himself  
beside  it is satisfied."  (According  to the narration  of Abu Ubaid  on the authority  
of Ali Ibn Abu Talib:  "I advise  you to adhere  to the middle  position  to which  the 
high is levelled  down  and the low is raised  up.”
According  to Ibn Abbas  "Allah  be pleased  with both":  "Verily,  the error has 
sweetness  in the hearts  of its doers."  In confirmation  of that, Allah Almighty  
says: " Leave  alone  those  who take their religion  to be mere  play and amusement,  
and are deceived  by the life of this world."  (Al-An'am  70)
i O '^3 ^ \)j£\  jjf jij >
And: " Is he, then,  to whom  the evil of his conduct  is made  alluring,  so that he 
looks  upon  it as good,  (equal  to one who is righdy  guided)?"  (Fatir  8)
4 (cj) LLo- t\Yj j4J f161
Such of innovations  as have been made  after the holy companions  "Allah  be 
pleased  with them"  which  have not been integral  to the religion,  and have been  
beyond  the demand  of necessity  and need belong to the mere play and 
amusement.
It is narrated  that Iblis "Allah's  Curse be upon him" scattered  his soldiers  
(from  Satans)  during  the lifetime  of the holy companions  "Allah  be pleased  with  
them" (to induce  them to violate  the right way and law of religion),  but they  
returned  with failure  and they were in the state of sadness.  He asked  them  about  
their state, and they said: "We've  never  seen the like of those (to whom  you've  
sent us), and we have failed to do headway  with them,  and they troubled  us so 
much."  He said to them:  "No doubt,  you have no power  over them,  for they've  
enjoyed  the company  of their  Prophet,  and attended  the Divine  Revelation  which  
He sent down  upon His Messenger.  But after them, there will come a people,  
from whom  you will be able to fulfill your need."  When  it was the age of the 
followers,  he sent his soldiers  to scatter  among  them,  and later they went  back  to
seen more amazing  than those: we him disappointed,  and said: "We've  never  
trapped  them  into a sin after another,  and when  it was the end of the day, they  
went  on asking  for (Allah's)  Forgiveness,  thereupon  Allah  would  change  their  evil 
deeds into good deeds."  He said to them: "Then,  you will not be able to do 
headway  with those,  for their right belief  in monotheism,  and following  the right  
way of their Prophet.  But afterwards,  there  will come  a people,  with whom  you 
will be well-pleased:  you will play with them  as you wish,  and drive  them  with the 
reins of their desires  as you like. If they will ask for Allah's  forgiveness  He will


Page 164:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
not answer  them,  nor will they repent  so that Allah  might  change  their sins into 
good  deeds.”  And so after  the first century  (of Hegira)  there  came  another  group  
of men among  whom  the Devil  kindled  desires,  and made  alluring  to them  their  
innovations  which  they rendered  lawful,  and set them up as their religion.  They  
neither  asked for Allah's  forgiveness  nor did they turn to Allah in repentance  
from their sins. The result  was that their enemies  were given  power  over them  
and led them  wherever  they desired.
But, you might  say: "From  which  sources  has the narrator  of this story  known  
what Iblis had said, since he did not see Iblis, nor did Iblis tell him anything  of 
that?"162
=
P
It should  be known  to you that the mysteries  of the Dominion  might be 
disclosed  to those  of hearts,  once  by way of inspiration  in such a way as to enable  
them to receive  a passing  idea which  occurs  to their minds,  knowing  not from  
where  it has come  to them,  and once  by way of a true vision  in a dream,  and once  
during  wakefulness,  by discovering  the hidden  meanings  through  the visible  
examples,  as though  in a dream,  and this is the highest  degree  since it is one of 
the high degrees  of Prophethood,  just as the true vision  in a dream  is one of 
forty-six  parts  of Prophethood.
So, beware  of making  your portion  of this science  the rejection  of what  goes  
beyond  the limit of your finite understanding,  for it is in this that the pedantic  
among  the learned  men have been ruined,  when they alleged  their knowledge  
have encompassed  all intellectual  sciences.  It is much  better  to be ignorant  than  
to deny such things  for the devotees  of Allah  Almighty,  and he, who denies  that 
to Allah's  devotees  would  be inevitably  forced  to deny the Prophets  and thus  
come  out of the pale of religion.
One of the Gnostics  said: "the Substitutes  (Abdal)  throughout  the land have  
disappeared  and have screened  themselves  from the sight of the public  for they  
could  not endure  looking  at the learned  men of the present  time,  who are, in their  
sight, ignorant  of Allah Almighty,  even though  they are, in their own sights  as 
well as in the sight  of the ignorant,  knowledgeable  of Allah  Almighty."  According  
to Sahl At-Tastari:  "One  of the greatest  sin is to be ignorant  of the ignorance,  and 
watch  the life of the laymen,  and listen to the speech  of the heedless;  and no 
attention  should  be paid to the saying  of every  learned  man who delves  into this 
world,  and moreover,  he should  be accused  in all of what  he says, for everyman  
always  delves  into what he likes, and repels  what opposes  his own desire."  For 
this reason,  Allah  says: " nor obey  any whose  heart  We have permitted  to neglect  
the remembrance  of Us, one who follows  his own desires,  whose  case has gone  
beyond  all bounds."  (Al-Kahf  28)
4 lij> jOjA I £olj b ZaIli ULLpI Ja f
It is taken  for granted  that the disobedient  layman  is happier  than the ignoranti


Page 165:
Book  One:  Knowledge
of the way of religion,  who renders  himself  learned,  for the former  admits  his 
laxity, which leads him to ask for Allah's Forgiveness  and turn to Him in 
repentance  from his sins, whereas  the latter who is ignorant  regards  himself  a 
learned  man,  is occupied  by those  sciences,  which  serve  as his means  to gain the 
worldly  benefits,  from following  the real path of religion,  thereupon  he neither  
turn to Allah  in repentance,  nor does he ask for His Forgiveness:  on the contrary,  
he keeps  on his conduct  until his death.
But, since  that prevails  on most  men,  except  those  whom  Allah  Almighty  have  
saved,  and there  is no hope for reforming  them,  the safest  thing  for the cautious  
man of religion  is to seek seclusion  and solitude.  This will be discussed  in the 
Book of Seclusion.  For this reason  Yusuf  Ibn Asbat  wrote to Hudhaifah  Al- 
Mar ‘ashi: “What  do you think  of a man who has found  none  to join with him in 
the celebration  of Allah  but that he is a criminal  whose  companionship  is sinful? ” 
In other  words,  he found  no pleasant  company;  and he was right, because  the 
company  of people  is never free from backbiting,  hearing  of backbiting,  or 
keeping  silence  of evil. The best that the learned  man can do is either  to benefit  
others  by his knowledge  or to benefit  himself  by the knowledge  of others.  Had  
this poor  man but considered  the matter  and realized  that it was not possible  for 
him to get any benefit  without  its being  tainted  with the blemishes  of hypocrisy  
and the desire  of wealth  and power,  he would  have known  that the receiver  of his 
benefit  is inclined  to make  it a means  for gaining  this world  and an instrument  for 
evil, in which  he would  be his supporter,  accomplice,  an auxiliary  who would  
provide  him with his tools and instruments.  He would  be like the merchant  who  
would  supply  the brigands  with their swords.  For knowledge  is like the sword,  
and its proper  use is in the service  of good as the proper  use of the sword  is in 
fighting.  So, no merchant  is allowed  to sell his swords  to such of men as from  
whose  states  he can know  that he will use it to carry  out highway  robberies.
Those  are twelve  characteristics  of the learned  men of the hereafter,  each of 
which  comprises  many  qualities  of the early learned  men. Be, then,  one of two: a 
man who possesses  these  qualities,  or a man who admits  his failure  to have all of 
them,  even though  he acknowledges  them. But by no means  should  you be the 
third one, (who neither  possesses  those qualities  nor admits  his failure  to have  
them),  lest you will confuse  yourself  and substitute  the instrument  of religion  for 
the luxuries  of this world,  and compare  the biographies  of the idle to those  of the 
learned men who are well-established  in knowledge,  and join, with your  
ignorance  and rebellion  the crowd  of those  who are doomed  to destruction  and 
despair.  We seek refuge  with Allah  from  the deceit  of Satan  through  which  many  
have perished,  and ask Allah to make us of those  who are not deceived  by this 
world,  nor are they prompted  to deny  Allah  Almighty  because  of their  conceit.163


Page 166:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 164
CHAPTER  SEVEN:
ON MIND:  US HONOUR,  REALITY  AND DIVISIONS
The Exposition  Of The Honour  Of Mind
It should  be known  to you that this topic is not in need to be explained,  
since  through  it the honour  of knowledge  has appeared  earlier;  and to be sure,  
the mind is the source,  fountainhead  and foundation  of knowledge,  and 
knowledge  springs  from  it in the same  way as the fruit springs  from  a tree, the 
light from the sun, and the vision  from the eye. How should  that which  is the 
means  of happiness  in this world  as well as in the hereafter  not be honoured?  
Moreover,  how should  there be doubt  in its existence,  seeing  that a beast,  
while  lacking  the faculty  of discernment,  deems  high the mind to the extent  
that the hugest,  strongest  and the most  brutal  of animals,  seeing  the face of a 
human  being,  retires  and feels afraid  of him, because  of its sense  that man has 
power  over it, in view  of the faculty  of resourcefulness,  which  is characteristic  
of him in particular.  For this reason,  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon him" said (according  to the narration  of Ibn Hibban  on 
the authority  of Ibn Umar):  "The chief  among  his people  is like the Prophet  
among  his nation."
This is due not to the abundance  of his wealth,  nor to his great  person,  nor to 
his enormous  power,  but it is rather  due to his great  experience  which  is a fruit of 
his mind.  For this reason,  you see the Turks,  Kurds,  as well as the ruffians  among  
the Arabs  and all other people,  in spite of their closeness  in their lives to the 
beasts,  respect  their sheikhs  by nature.  Similarly,  when many obstinate  rebels  
among  the Arabs,  who had made  up their minds  to kill the Messenger  of Allah,  
saw him and cast a glance  at his honoured  countenance,  they feared  him, and the 
radiant  light of Prophethood  shone  on them through  his face, although  it was 
only latent  in his soul in the same  way as the mind  is.
It is true that the honour  of mind  is intuitively  known,  our aim here  is to relate  
many traditions  and narrations  which  make a mention  of such honour.  Allah  
Almighty  gives it the name of light in His saying:  "Allah  is the Light of the 
heavens  and the earth;  and the like of His Light  is as if there  were a Niche  and 
within  it a Lamp."  (An-Nur  35)
4 v/OVfj  c/yluT  jJj ^
He also gives the knowledge  obtained  through  it such names  as the spirit,  
revelauon  and life, as shown  in His saying:  "As such We have revealed  to you a 
Spirit  by Our Command."  (Ash-Shura  52)
4 iyj liU'uSj  ^
He further  says: "Is he, who was dead and We have given him life, and 
ordained  for him a light therewith  to walk among  the people  like him whose  
example  is in darkness  whence  he never  comes  forth?"  (Al-An'am  122)


Page 167:
Book  One: Knowledge 165
What  is intended  here by light and darkness  is knowledge  and ignorance,  
as confirmed  by His Statement:  "We bring them out of darkness  to light."  
(Al-Baqarah  257)
i <© jj jyf\ }
In this context,  (it is narrated  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that) the 
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "O people!  
Know  Allah and be ruled by mind,  perchance  you will know  what has been  
enjoined  upon you and what you have been forbidden.  Be sure that mind is 
your glory before  Allah. He who obeys Allah,  even though  he might seem  
ugly, his rank lowly, his station humble  and his appearance  shabby,  is 
intelligent;  but he who disobeys  Allah, even though  he might  seem good-  
looking,  his rank exalted,  his station  noble,  his appearance  fair, and his power  
of speech  sharp and fluent,  is ignorant.  Therefore,  the apes and pigs are, in 
the sight of Allah,  mindful  than he who disobeys.  Be not deceived  by the 
honour  given  to such disobedient  by the men of this world,  for verily  they are 
of those  who are given  to loss."
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said 
(according  to the narration  of At-Tabarani  on the authority  of Abu Umamah,  and 
Abu Na'im  on the authority  of A'ishah):  "The first thing  which  Allah  created  was 
the mind.  When  He Almighty  created  it He said to it: 'Come  forth!'  and it did 
accordingly.  He then said to it once again: 'Come  back!'  and it did accordingly.  
Then  Allah  Almighty  said: 'By My power  and glory I have created  nothing  more  
honourable  in My Sight than you. With you I take, with you I give, with you I 
reward  and with you I punish."
But you may raise the following  question:  'If this mind is an accident,  how  
should  it have been created  before  all other substances,  and if it is an essence,  
how should  it be a self-existent  essence  and not be isolated?'  it should  be known  
that this belongs  to the science  of Revelation,  and it is not fitting  to discuss  it 
under  the science  of practical  religion,  and our aim at present  is to discuss  these
sciences.
It is narrated  (by Ibn Al-Muhabbar  and At-Tirmidhi)  on the authority  of Anas  
"Allah be pleased  with him" that he said: The people  praised  a man in the 
presence  of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him",  
and exceeded  the due limit of eulogy.  On that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "What  about  the state of his mind?"  they  
said: "Do we tell you about  his endeavour  in religious  service  and doing  good  
deeds,  and you ask us about the state of his mind?"  the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "Verily,  the foolish  does evil with  
his ignorance  than what a wicked  man does with his wickedness.  Indeed,  the 
worshippers  will rise in the future (i.e. in the hereafter)  up to the ranks which


Page 168:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 166
draw  them  near  unto  their  Lord  as high as are their  minds."
It is narrated  (by Ibn Al-Muhabbar)  on the authority  of Umar "Allah  be 
pleased  with him" that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon him" said: "There  is no man (better  than him who) has the like of the 
excellence  of mind,  therewith  to lead his companion  to the right  guidance,  and 
keep him away from sin; and none should  have his faith complete  until his 
mind  is mature."  (It is further  narrated  by Ibn Al-Muhabbar  on the authority  of 
Amr Ibn Shu'aib  from his father  from his grandfather  and At-Tirmidhi  on the 
authority  of A'ishah  that) the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon  him" said: "A man attains,  with his good  manners,  the rank of the fasdng  
person,  who regularly  stands  (for night  supererogatory  prayers);  and a man will 
not complete  his good manners  until his mind is mature,  and at that point,  he 
will have completed  his faith,  obeyed  his Lord,  and disobeyed  his enemy  Iblis."
It is narrated  (by Ibn Al-Muhabbar)  on the authority  of Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri  
"Allah  be pleased  with him" that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace be upon him" said: "Everything  has a supporting  prop (on which he 
depends),  and the supporting  prop of a faithful  believer  is his mind; and his 
religious  service  is achieved  just in proportion  to his mind. Have  you not heard  
the statement  of the wicked  men while being in the fire (of Hell): "Had we 
hearkened  or had good understanding,  surely,  we would  have not been among  
the denizens  of the blazing  fire." (Al-Mulk  10)
^ * U L (JaLj j \ yi ijJ iij ^
It is narrated  (by Ibn Al-Muhabbar)  on the authority  of Umar "Allah  be 
pleased  with him" that he asked Tamim  Ad-Dari:  "What does achieve  the 
supreme  authority  among  you?" he said: "The sound  mind."  He said: "You've  
told the truth.  When  I asked  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon  him" the same  question  he said the same as you had said, and resumed:  
"I asked  Gabriel  "Peace  be upon  him":  "What  does achieve  supreme  authority?"  
he said: The sound  mind.'"
It is narrated  (by Ibn Al-Muhabbar)  on the authority  of Al-Bara'  Ibn Azib  
"Allah  be pleased  with him" that he said: One day, so many  questions  were  raised  
to the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" thereupon  
he said: "O people!  Everything  has a mainstay,  and the man's mainstay  is his 
mind;  and the most  credible  and the most  ready  among  you to know  the facts is 
the one who has the best mind  among  you."
It is narrated  (by Ibn Al-Muhabbar)  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  "Allah  
be pleased  with him" that he said: When  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon him" returned  from the holy battle of Uhud,  he heard the 
people  saying:  "So and so is braver  than so and so. So and so has endeavoured  in 
fighting  better  than so and so." And the like of that. On that the Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "As for this matter,  you


Page 169:
Book  One: Knowledge
have no knowledge  of it." they asked:  "How  is that O Messenger  of Allah?"  the 
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "They  fought  
in proportion  to their minds  doomed  by Allah to them, and their victory  and 
intentions  have  been  also in proportion  to their  minds.  The casualties  received  by 
Such of them  as were afflicted  have been at different  stages.  When  it will be the 
Day of Judgement,  they will have their stages according  to their different  
intentions  and minds."
It is narrated  (by Ibn Al-Muhabbar  and Ad-Daraqatni)  on the authority  of Al- 
Bara' Ibn Azib "Allah  be pleased  with him" that the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah ’s 
blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "The angels  have endeavoured  and done  
their best assiduously  with the mind in obedience  of Allah Almighty;  and the 
faithful  believers  from  among  mankind  have endeavoured  and done their best in 
obedience  of Allah  Almighty  in proportion  to their minds;  and the one who is the 
most ready to do deeds in obedience  of Allah Almighty  is he, who has the 
greatest  mind  among  them."
It is narrated  (by Ibn Al-Muhabbar  and At-Tirmidhi)  on the authority  of 
A'ishah  "Allah  be pleased  with her" that she said: I said: "O Messenger  of 
Allah! With which  are the people  given superiority  over each other in this 
world?"  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him"  
said: "With  the mind."  I further  asked:  "And  in the hereafter?"  he said: "Also  
with the mind."  I exclaimed:  "Is it not that they will be rewarded  for their  
deeds?"  on that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" said: "O A'ishah!  Do they do deeds but as much  as such of minds  as 
have been given to them by Allah?  Their  deeds are as much as their minds  
make available  to them to do, and they will be rewarded  as much as their  
deeds  will be."
It is narrated  (by Ibn Al-Muhabbar)  on the authority  of Ibn Abbas  "Allah  be 
pleased  with both" that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon him" said: "Everything  has a tool and an instrument,  and the mind  
constitutes  the believer's  tool and instrument;  and everything  has a mainstay,  and 
the mind constitutes  the man's  mainstay;  and everything  has a supporting  prop,  
and the mind  constitutes  the religion's  supporting  prop;  and every  people  have a 
final objective,  and the mind constitutes  the final objective  of Allah's  devotees;  
and every people  have their caller, and the mind constitutes  the caller of the 
worshippers;  and every  merchant  has his commodities,  and the mind  constitutes  
the commodities  of the scholars;  and every  house  has a caretaker,  and the mind  
constitutes  the caretaker  of the houses of the saints; and every ruin has 
rehabilitation,  and the mind  constitutes  the rehabilitation  of death;  and every  man  
has offspring  who belong  to him and perpetuates  his memory,  and the mind  
constitutes  the offspring  of the saints,  who belong  to them  and perpetuate  their  
memory;  and every  journey  has a shelter,  and the mind constitutes  the shelter  of 
the faithful  believers."167


Page 170:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 168
(It is narrated  by Ibn Al-Muhabbar  on the authority  of Ibn Umar  that) the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "The dearest  
amongst  the faithful  believers  to Allah  Almighty  is he, who toils in obedience one
of Allah Almighty,  is sincere  in his advice  to His servants,  has his mind attain  
maturity,  admonishes  himself,  therewith  he sees the truth and acts upon it 
accordingly  during  his lifetime,  and (not only) prospers  (but) also causes  others  to 
succeed."
(It is narrated  by Ibn Al-Muhabbar  on the authority  of Abu Qatadah  that) the 
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "He who has 
the most  mature  mind  among  you is the most  Allah-fearing  among  you, the best  
of you to abide  by what  Allah  Almighty  has enjoined  and what  He has forbidden,  
even though  he does the least  voluntary  deeds  among  you."
The Exposition  Of The Reality  And Divisions  Of Mind
It should  be known  that the people  differ  in defining  mind,  and most  of them  
forget  that this difference  is due to the fact that the word  mind  designates  various  
things,  and this is the reason  for their difference.  The enlightening  fact to which  
no doubt rises is that 'Aql' is a homonymous  word, which designates  four  
different  meanings,  just in the same  way as the word 'Ayn' and the like of it are. 
For this reason,  a single definition  should  not be sufficient  to describe  those  
meanings,  and rather  each one should  have  its independent  definition.
The first is to describe  that thing that distinguishes  man from all the other  
animals,  therewith  he is ready to accept and understanding  the theoretical  
sciences,  and grasp the intellectual  abstract  arts. It is the same thing  intended  by 
Al-Harith  Ibn As'ad  Al-Muhasibi  who says in defining  the mind:  "It is an instinct  
therewith  the theoretical  sciences  are perceivable,  as if it were  light to be cast into 
the heart,  with the help of which  things  become  comprehensible."  But, he was 
unjust  who refuted  that definition,  and rather  reduced  the mind  to grasp  only the 
axiomatic  knowledge,  since he who is heedless  of this knowledge  as well as the 
sleeping  one are called  intelligent,  since they have this instinct,  even though  they  
are lacking  the comprehension  of this knowledge.
As well as life is an instinct,  therewith  man is ready  for selective  motions  and 
sense  perception,  mind also is an instinct  therewith  some animals  are ready  to 
grasp  many  theoretical  sciences.  Had it been possible  to make  equality  between  
man and donkey  as far as the instinct  and sense perception  are concerned,  in 
such a way as to say, for example:  "There  is no difference  between  them  except  
that Allah Almighty,  as a matter  of course,  creates  in man many faculties  of 
perceiving  sciences,  which  He does not create  in a donkey,  as well as in the 
other  beasts",  it then would  have been proper  to make  such equality  between  a 
donkey  and an inanimate  thing  as far as existence  is concerned,  in such a way as 
to say: "There  is no difference  between  both except  that Allah  Almighty,  as a 
matter  of course,  creates  in the donkey  some  particular  movements";  and had it


Page 171:
Book  One: Knowledge 169
been possible  to regard  a donkey  as a dead inanimate  thing,  it then should  have  
been said that all movements  seen from itare created  in it by Allah  Almighty  
according  to the very sequence  in which  they are done,  and as well as it should  
be said that it differs  from the inanimate  thing,  in relation  to movements,  but 
with a particular  instinct  characteristic  of it, expressed  by life, man also differs  
from the beasts,  in relation  to perception  of theoretical  sciences,  but with an 
instinct  characteristic  of him, expressed  by mind.
It is like a mirror,  which differs from the other bodies in its power  of 
reflecting  images  and colour,  with a particular  quality  characteristic  of it, i.e. the 
polish.  The same is true of the eye, which  is different  from the forehead  with  
qualities  and features,  which  enable  it to see. To be sure, the relation  of this 
instinct  to knowledge  is like the relation  of the eye to vision;  and the relation  of 
the Holy Qur'an  and law to this instinct  in so far as it leads to the unfolding  of 
sciences  to it is like the relation  of the sunlight  to the sight. As such you should  
understand  this instinct.
The second  applies  to such of sciences  as come to existence  with the 
discerning  child who is able to make sense to the possibility  of what  is possible  
and the impossibility  of what  is impossible,  just as the knowledge  of the fact that 
the two are greater  than the one, and that a single person  could,  by no means,  
exist in two places  simultaneously.  This is what is meant  by a theologian  in his 
definition  of mind, in which he says: "It is the knowledge  of the axiomatic  
sciences,  just as the knowledge  of the possibility  of what is possible  and the 
impossibility  of what is impossible."  This definition  is right in itself, for this 
knowledge  exists,  and giving  them the name  of mind  is evident.  But it is invalid  
to deny this instinct,  and rather  affirm  that nothing  exists  other  than this kind of 
knowledge.
The third  applies  to knowledge  obtained  through  experience  in the course  of 
events.  One might  be described  as intelligent  when his teeth have been cut by 
experience,  and educated  by time; and the opposite  is described  as an 
unintelligent  dim-wetted  ignorant.  This kind of knowledge  is called  mind.
The fourth  is that this instinct  attains  such a power  and strength  as to enable  
it to know  the expected  ends and consequences  of matters,  curb the lust which  
hankers  for an urgent  pleasure;  and if one has this power,  he might  be called  an 
intelligent,  in so far as his going  on undertaking  and retiring  from are dominated  
by his consideration  of the expected  ends and consequences,  and is not 
controlled  by any urgent  pleasure.  This also is characteristic  of man, therewith  he 
is distinguished  from  all beasts  and animals.
The first is the foundation,  source  and fountainhead  of the other  three.  The  
second  is the branch  nearest  to the first, the third is an offshoot  of both the first 
and the second  together,  since with the power  of the instinct  and axiomatic  
knowledge,  the empirical  sciences  are 
ultimate  goal. The first two are integral  to nature,  and the last two are acquired.  
For this reason  Ali "Might  Allah  honour  him" said: "I see that knowledge  is ofobtained.  The fourth  is the final fruit and


Page 172:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
two kinds: that which  is integral  to nature,  and that which  is obtained  through  
acquisition,  But no acquired  knowledge  is of any use in the absence  of natural  
knowledge,  in the same  way as the light of the sun is of no benefit  When  the light  
of the eyes is shut off."
The first, i.e. that which  is integral  to nature  is intended  by the statement  of 
the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" (according  
to the narration  of At-Tirmidhi  on the authority  of Al-Hassan  from many  
companions):  "Allah  has created  nothing  more honorable  to His Sight than  
the mind."
The last, i.e. the acquired  knowledge,  is intended  by the statement  of the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" (according  to the 
narration  of Abu Na'im  on the authority  of Ali): "When  men draw near unto  
Allah with righteousness  and many kinds of good deeds,  you might  draw near  
unto Him with your learning."  The same is meant  by the statement  of the 
h essenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" (according  to the 
narration  of Ibn Al-Muhabbar  and At-Tirmidhi  on the authority  of Abu Ad- 
Darda')  to Abu Ad-Darda':  "Advance  in learning  perchance  you will draw  nearer  
unto your Lord."  Abu Ad-Darda'  exclaimed:  "May my father and mother  be 
sacrificed  for you! How  can I do that?"  The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  
him" replied:  "Avoid  the taboos  of Allah Almighty  and fulfill His commands  
perchance  you will be wise; do such of deeds as are good and righteous,  
perchance  you will advance  in exaltation  and honour  in this world,  and attain  
nearness  and power  from  your  Lord  in the world  to come."
It is narrated  (by Ibn Al-Muhabbar)  on the authority  of Sa'id Ibn Al- 
Musayyab  that he said: Umar,  Ubai Ibn Ka'b and Abu Hurairah  "Allah  be 
pleased  with them"  visited  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon  him" and said: "O Messenger  of Allah!  Who  is the most  knowledgeable  
among  the people?"  He "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "The  
intelligent  mindful."  They further  asked: "Then,  who is the best worshipper  
among  the people?"  he said: "The  intelligent  mindful."  They  asked:  "Then,  who  
is the best among  the people?"  he said: "The  intelligent  mindful."  They  said: "Is 
it not that the intelligent  mindful  is he whose  manhood  is perfect,  eloquence  
evident,  generosity  is clear, and position  is great?"  on that the Messenger  of 
Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "All of that is but chattels  
of this world,  and the hereafter,  in the Presence  of your Lord,  is only for the 
righteous."  (Az-Zukhruf  35)
i 0 iXp Jkt 5>HM j Lill  lij iU/i 0)3 >
(He then resumed)  "The intelligent  mindful  is the righteous  Allah-fearing,  
even though  he seems  in this world  inferior  and lowly."
According  to another  narration  (transmitted  by Ibn Al-Muhabbar  on the 
authority  of Sa'id Ibn Al-Musayyab)  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon him" said: "The intelligent  mindful  is he, who believes  in Allah,  
trusts  his Messengers,  and obeys  Him through  His deeds."170


Page 173:
Book  One:  Knowledge
The original  meaning  of the word 'Aql' (mind)  seems  in both language  and 
usage  to have been  given  to this instinct.  But it comes  to designate  knowledge  as 
far as it is its direct  fruit, in the same way as to designate  anything  with its direct  
fruit. It is said, for example:  "Knowledge  is to safeguard  oneself  (from  Allah's  
punishment),  and the learned  man of knowledge  is he who fears Allah most."  
However,  piety  is the direct  fruit of knowledge,  (in the same  way as knowledge  is 
the direct fruit of the mind) and thus it designates  the fruit of such instinct  
allegorically.  But it is not our purpose  now to scrutinize  this linguistic  meaning.
It is to say that all those four divisions  are included  and designated  by the 
word,  and there is no difference  among  the learned  men about  their existence,  
and in case of any, it applies  only to the first one. But the true fact is that it exists,  
and it represents  the origin  of all. Those  divisions  of knowledge  seem  to lie in the 
instinct  by nature,  but they come  to light when  a certain  reason  appears  to bring  
them out, as if there is no external  influence  to affect  their existence,  and rather  
they remain  inherent  in it until they emerge,  like the water in the land, which  
appears  on digging  a well; and it collects  at the bottom  of the well and can be 
distinguished  by sense;  but even, no new element  is introduced  in this process.  
The same is true of the oil in almond  nuts and the attar in rose petals.  For this 
reason Allah Almighty  says: "And when your Lord brought  forth their  
descendants  from the loins of the sons of Adam  and took them to witness  
against  themselves,  saying:  'Am I not your Lord?'  They  said: Yes, we witness  to 
that ’.". (Al-A'raf:  172)
cuZJl TJs> Cr? Yl'e M3 }
What  is meant  here is their declaration  of souls,  and not verbal  profession,  for 
men are divided  in relation  to verbal  profession  into two factions:  believers  and 
unbelievers.  Henceforth  Allah  Almighty  says: "If you ask them  who created  them,  
they will be sure to say: 'Allah'."  This means  that if they would  only consider  their  
condition,  their souls and hearts would witness  to the fact that it is Allah  
Almighty  Who created  them (in conformity  to) "the true nature  on which  Allah  
created  them."  In other  words  every  human  being  is created  to be a believer,  and 
every  human  being  is created  with an inherent  knowledge  of things  as they are in 
reality,  i.e. this knowledge  seems  as if they were  inherent  in it for it is nearly  ready  
to perceive  it as it is.
On the other hand, since belief  is well-established  by nature  in the human  
soul, the human  beings  have been divided  into two groups:  one has turned  away  
from  that belief  and has forgotten  all about  it, and those  are the unbelievers,  and 
the other has thought  of the matter,  and remembered,  like one who bears a 
witness,  and, being  heedless  for a while,  has forgotten  all about  it, but finally  has 
remembered  it. For this reason Allah Almighty  says: "Perchance  they may  
remember"  (Al-Baqarah  221)171


Page 174:
- The quarter  of the acts of worship 172
And: "That  those  endued  with sound  minds  may remember"  (Sad 29)
And: "And remember  Allah's  favour  upon  you, and His covenant  which  He 
had covenanted  with you" (Al-Ma'idah  7)
4 S|Y'-ti  A5' ^
And: "And we have rendered  the Qur'an available  as a sign to be 
remembered,  but is there  anyone  who will remember?"  (Al-Qamar  17)
4 Cr? U43 ^yH. ^
To give such the name of remembrance  is not far-fetched.  This  
remembrance  is of two kinds:  one is to recall  an image  which  once existed  in 
one’s mind but has vanished,  and the other is to recall an image which  is 
inherent  in one’s mind  by nature.
These  facts are evident  to him who has the faculty  to perceive  things  with the 
help of the light of his insight,  but are abstruse  to him who is given to blind  
imitation  and acceptance  of things  rather  than to investigation  and observation.  
Thus,  you find such man entangled  in the like of these  Verses,  committing  many  
illogical  and arbitrary  prejudiced  mistakes  in the interpretation  of remembrance  
and the declaration  of souls, having  the false impression  that the Prophetic  
traditions  and the Qur'an  are full of contradictions.  Such an attitude  may  
overpower  him in such a way as to make him regard them with contempt.  
Moreover,  he might  think  they are incoherent.
He is like a blind man who enters  a house  and, stumbling  over some  utensils  
says: "Why  were not these utensils  removed  from the way and returned  to their  
places?"  He is then told: "They  are in their  right  places  and it is your sight that is 
wrong.  The same is true of the inconsistency  of the insight,  if not worse  and 
graver because  the soul is like a horseman  and the body a horse, and the 
blindness  of the horseman  is more  harmful  than that of the horse.  In comparison  
between  insight  and sight Allah Almighty  says: "By no means has his heart  
falsified  what  he saw" (An-Najm  11)
And: "And  thus did We show  Abraham  the dominion  of the Heavens  and the 
Earth."  (Al-An'am  75)
The opposite  of both is called blindness  as shown  in the saying  of Allah  
Almighty:  "For surely  it is not the eyes that are blind,  but blind are the hearts  
which  are in the breasts."  (Al-Hajj  46)


Page 175:
Book  One: Knowledge173
He Almighty  farther  says: "And  he who is blind in this (world)  will be in the 
hereafter  blind  and more  straying  from  the path."  (Al-Isra'  72)
4 (©) !3 ^ Lo-l_a ^ ^
Some of those matters  which  were disclosed  to the prophets  were revealed  
through  the sight and others  through  the insight,  but both were called  vision.  In 
short  he whose  insight  is not shrewd  will understand  nothing  of religion  except  
its husks  and outward  forms  rather  than its pith and truth. These,  then are the 
different  divisions  to which  the word  'Aql' is applied.
The Exposition  Of People's  Disparity  Of Mind
The people  are different  as to the matter  of disparity  of mind,  and there  is no 
significance  of being concerned  with reladng  the speech of those of little  
knowledge;  and it is more  important  to take the inidadve  to tell the truth in this 
respect.  The evident  fact in which  there  is no doubt  is to say that this discrepancy  
applies  to the four divisions  barring  the second,  which  belongs  to the axiomadc  
knowledge  of the possibility  of what is possible  and the impossibility  of what is 
impossible.  He, who is able to make sense to the fact that the two are greater  
than the one is also able to know  that one thing  could,  by no means,  exist in two 
places  simultaneously,  and that in no way could  both eternity  and origination  be 
ascribed  to one thing;  and the same is true of all things,  and what is evidendy  
perceived  with no doubt.  But the disparity  pervades  the other  three  divisions.
Therefore,  the people's  disparity  of the fourth  division,  i.e. the power  of 
overcoming  lusts, is not hidden.  Moreover,  it is evident  that the states of one 
person  might  be different  in that from  time to time.  This disparity  is partly  due to 
the difference  of the power  of the desire,  in such a way that an intelligent  might  
be able to abandon  a desire  and persist  in another,  even though  not restricted  to 
it. a youth,  for example,  might  fail to abandon  adultery,  but when he grows  up 
and attains maturity,  he might become  capable  of leaving  it. the desire for 
showing  off and power of authority  becomes  stronger  not weaker  with the 
advancement  of age. It is also partly  due to the difference  of knowledge  of the 
harm  and damage  caused  by this desire.
For this reason,  a physician  might  be able to safeguard  himself  from some  
harmful  kinds  of food. It is true that he who has the same  intelligence  might  not 
have the same capability  because  of his lacking  of medical  knowledge,  even  
though  he thinks there is harm in those kinds of food, but the more the 
knowledge  of the physician  is perfect,  the more he feels afraid;  and in this way,  
such fear acts as an instrument  and a tool for the mind to help it overcome  and
man might  be more capable  than the break the desires.  Similarly,  the learned  
ignorant  of refraining  from sins, in view of his knowledge  of the evil 
consequences  of disobedience;  and of course  I mean here the real learned  man,  
and not those  of the flowing  robes  who dote and rave and prate of things  they  
know  little about.
If disparity  results  from the divergence  of the power  of the desire,  it does not


Page 176:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 174
then belong  to the disparity  of mind; and if it results from the difference  of 
knowledge,  we have given this kind of knowledge  the name of mind, for it 
strengthens  the instinct  of mind, and thus the disparity  results from that 
knowledge  to which  the name is applied.  It might  also result merely  from the 
difference  of the instinct  of mind, for the stronger  it becomes,  the more it is 
inevitably  capable  of overcoming  the desire.
As for the third division,  i.e. the empirical  knowledge,  the people's  disparity  
therein  could  not be denied.  However,  they differ  in the amount  of acquisition,  
and rate of perception;  and this is due either  to the disparity  of instinct  or to the 
disparity  of practice.  As for the first, which  is the origin,  i.e. the instinct,  there is 
no way to deny the disparity  therein.  It is like the light which  rises onto the soul,  
and dawns  with the beginning  of the age of discernment,  and then  grows  with the 
progress  of time and develops  gradually  until it attains  its maturity  around  the age 
of forty.  The parable  of it is like the light of the morning,  whose  commencements  
are too hard to see and then it gradually  increases  until it reaches  its completion  
with the emergence  of the disk of the sun. the disparity  of insight  is like that of 
sight; and the difference  is visible  between  the weak-sighted  and the sharp-  
sighted.
The ordinance  of Allah governs  all His creatures  with the principles  of 
graduation  in development.  The sex instinct,  for example,  does not appear  with a 
child suddenly  all at once at the age of puberty,  but rather  it gradually  appears  
little by little. The same is true of all the other forces  and facilities.  Indeed,  he 
who denies  the disparity  of men in this instinct  is loose outside  the limits of 
sanity,  and he who thinks  that the mind  of the Prophet  is the same  as that of any 
of the outlandish  peasants  and desert  ruffians  is himself  meaner  than any of those  
outlandish  peasants.
How could  the disparity  of instinct  be denied  since in the absence  of it men  
would  not have varied  in their ability  to understand  knowledge,  nor would  they  
have been divided  into a stupid  who fail to understand  anything  except  after  long  
and wearisome  explanation  by teacher,  an outstanding  who responds  to the least  
sign, and a perfect  from whose soul truth emanates  without  any previous  
instruction,  as shown  from the statement  of Allah Almighty:  “Whose  oil would  
well nigh shine out, even though  fire touches  it not! It is light upon  light. ” (An-  
Nur 35)
i (jSjy 'J* jy 'Isei ^0 ^
this applies  to the Prophets  "Peace  be upon  them"  in whose  inward  thoughts  
obscure  things  are made  clear without  having  learnt  or heard  anything  alike.  This  
is described  by the word 'inspiration'.  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon  him" referred  to the like of that when  he said (according  to 
the narration  of Ash-Shirazi  on the authority  of Sahl Ibn Sa'd, and At-Tabarani  
on the authority  of Ali): “The holy spirit  whispered  the following  into my heart:  
'Love  whomever  you please,  for you will leave him; live anyway  as you like, for 
you will inevitably  die; do what  you like, for you will be rewarded  accordingly ’.”


Page 177:
Book  One: Knowledge
This kind of conveying  information  by the angels  to the Prophets  is different  
from clear revelation  with its implication  of hearing  a definite  voice  with the 
and seeing  the angel  with the eye; and this has been described  as whispering  into 
the heart. The stages  of revelation  are many,  but it is not fitting  to delve into 
them  under  the science  of practical  religion,  because  they belong  to the science  of 
Revelation.  But, think  not that the knowledge  of the stages  of revelation  requires  
that its knower  should  be a receiver  of revelation,  because  it is not improbable  
for a sick physician  to know  the different  stages  of health  or for a wicked  learned  
man to know  the different  stages  of justice  in spite of his lack of justice.  That's  
because  knowledge  is one thing  and the existence  of what is known  is another.  
Henceforth,  it is not that everyone  who knows  what  Prophethood  and sainthood  
are should  be himself  a Prophet  or a saint,  and it is not that everyone  who knows  
what  piety  and devoutness  are should  be himself  pious  or devout
That men are divided into those who take notice by themselves  and 
understand  those who do not understand  except through  warning  and 
instruction,  and those  who benefit  from neither,  is like the division  of the bosom  
of the earth into parts where  water  collects  and increases  until it bursts  out by 
itself into springs  of living water, parts where water collects  but cannot  be 
reached  without  digging,  and parts where  not even digging  will avail.  This is true 
of the disparity  of men in native  intellect.  In confirmation  to the disparity  of the 
mind,  it is narrated  (by Ibn Al-Muhabbar  and At-Tirmidhi  on the authority  of) 
Abdullah  Ibn Salam  that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon  him"  at the end of a long conversation,  described  the throne  and stated  that 
the angels  asked  Allah Almighty:  “ O our Lord! Have  You created  aught  greater  
than the throne? ” Allah  replied:  “Yes, the mind.”  The angels  said: "How  great is 
it?” Allah  answered:  "Verily  no one can grasp  its greatness.  Can you calculate  the 
number  of sand of the sea?”  They  said: "No. ” Allah  then replied:  “Verily  I have  
created  the mind in different  kinds as numerous  as the sand of the sea. Some  
men were  given  one grain,  others  two, three and four grains,  still others  received  
a good  portion,  others  a portion  equalling  a camel-load,  and others  even  greater. ”
groups  among  the Sufi disparage  the 
intellect  and reason  as well as the rational  and the reasonable?"  You should  know,  
then, that the reason  for it is that men have transferred  the term intellect  or 
reason  (Aql) and the term rational  or reasonable  (Ma'qil)  from their real and 
original  meaning  to another  and false meaning,  namely  argumentation  and debate  
over contradictions  and requisites,  which  is scholastic  theology.  Consequently  the 
Sufis could  not tell that men have erred  in this terminology,  especially  since  it has 
not been possible  to remove  that from their minds  in view  of its current  and well  
established  usage.  As a result  they disparaged  reason  and rationalism.  Could  it be 
imagined,  however,  that the light of the insight,  through  which  Allah is known  
and the truthfulness  of His Apostle  is recognized,  will 
belittled  when  Allah  Himself  praised  it? And if it were  ever disparaged  what  other  
thing  could  be praised?  But if the praiseworthy  knowledge  be the law, by what  is 
its truth known?  If it were known  through  the blameworthy  and unreliable175
ear
You may say: “Why then do some
be disparaged  or ever


Page 178:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
intellect,  that the law itself  is blameworthy.  No attention,  however,  is paid to him 
who says that the law is known  through  certainty  itself  (cAyn Al-Yawing)  and the 
light of belief  rather  than through  intellect,  because  we mean  by intellect  what  he 
means  by certain  sight and the light of belief,  namely  the inner  characteristics  by 
which  man is distinguished  from the animal  and through  which  he comprehends  
reality.176
Most  of these  wild errors  have arisen  from the ignorance  of some  who sought  
realities  in words  and erred  wildly  therein,  because  of the confusion  which  exists  
in the technical  terminologies  of men.


Page 179:
5TlE,
CHAPTER  ONE:  THE EXPOSITION  OF THE CREED  OF THE ESTABLISHED  
COMMUNITY  OF SUNNAH  AS MANIFESTED  IN THE TWO  STATEMENTS  
OF TESTIMONY  WHICH  FORM  THE FIRST  OF THE PILLARS  OF ISLAM.
The Meaning  Of The First Word  Of Testimony
We say, putting  our trust  in Allah:  Praise  be to Allah  the beginner  and restorer  
of creation,  the Doer of what He wills, Whose  throne  is glorious  and Whose  
power  is mighty,  Who guides  the elite among  His servants  to the straight  path  
and the right way, Who grants  them benefit  once they affirm  His Oneness  by 
safeguarding  their creeds  from the darkness  of suspicion  and hesitation,  Who  
leads them to emulate  His chosen  Apostle  and to copy the guidance  of his 
honoured  Companions  by directing  their footsteps  to the way of truth,  Who  rises  
to them  with His Glory  in His Essence  and Acts by His beautiful  attributes  which  
none perceives  barring  he who inclines  his ear in contemplation,  and makes  
known  to them that He is one in His Essence  without  any partner,  single  One  
without  any compeer,  eternal  without  any opposite,  uniquely  separate  without  any 
rival, and that He is one, eternally  ancient  with nothing  prior to Him, perpetual  
without  any beginning  before  Him, never-ending  with none after Him, undying  
without  any end, subsisting  without  cessation,  abiding  without  termination.
He has not ceased  and He will not cease to be described  by the epithets  of 
majesty.  At the end of time He will not be subject  to dissolution  and decay:  on 
the contrary,  "He is the first and the last, the Evident  and the Hidden,  and He 
has full knowledge  of all things."  (Al-Hadid  3)
i 0 >3 abLll'j  JjVl>  >
1- Transcendence  (Tanzih):  He is not a body having  a certain  form, nor a 
limited  or restricted  substance:  He does not resemble  other bodies  either in 
limitation  or in accepting  division,  nor is He a substance  since  by no means  could  
substances  exist in Him, nor is He an accident  since in no way could  accidents  
exist  in Him.  Nay! He resembles  no entity  and no entity  resembles  Him: "nothing  
is like unto Him and He is not like anything"  (Ash-Shura  11)
No measure  could  limit  Him and in no way could  boundaries  contain  Him;  no 
direction  could surround  Him and neither  the earths nor the Heavens  bound  
Him. Truly,  He is seated  on the throne  in the very way He described  and in the 
sense in which  He willed:  in a state of equilibrium  far removed  from contact,  
firmness,  stability,  envelopment,  and change.  The throne  does not support  Him,  
but the throne  and those  who carry  it are supported  by the grace  of His power
177


Page 180:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 178
and are controlled  by His Hand.
He is above  the throne  and above  the Heavens  and above  everything  to the 
limits  of the earth  in such a way as to bring  Him not nearer  to the throne  and the 
Heavens,  nor make  Him farther  from the earth. No, He is highly  exalted  above  
the throne and the Heavens,  just as He is highly exalted  above the earth,  
nonetheless  He is near to every  existing  being  and is “nearer  to a creature  than his 
jugular  vein”; and "He is witness  over  everything  since  His nearness  is not similar  
to the nearness  of bodies,  just as His essence  is not similar  to the essence  of 
bodies.  He does not exist in anything,  just as nothing  exists  in Him: exalted  and 
Hallowed  be He far above  any place to imply Him, and sanctified  be He far 
above  time to limit Him. Nay! He had been before  He created  time and place,  
and He is now in the same and very way He was. He is distinct  from His 
creatures  by virtue  of His attributes.
There  is nothing  in His essence  besides  Him, nor is His essence  in any other  
besides  Him. He is far removed  from  change  of state or location.  Events  have no 
place in Him and misfortunes  do not befall  Him. No, He does not cease,  in the 
epithets  of His Majesty,  to be far removed  from decay,  and in the attributes  of 
His perfection  He has no need of an increase  in perfection.  In His essence  His 
existence  is known  by reason;  His essence  is seen with the eyes, a favour  and a 
grace He will grant  to the righteous  in the everlasting  abode,  and a perfection  of 
bliss from  Him  through  seeing  His gracious  Countenance.
2- Life and Power:  We bear witness  that He is ever living,  All-powerful,  All- 
Compelling,  and all-subduing;  no inadequacy  nor weakness  befall Him; no 
slumber  nor sleep overtakes  Him;  no dissolution  nor death  does not prevail  over  
Him. He is the Lord of the Kingdom  and Dominion,  be it visible  or invisible,  the 
Lord of Power and Might: His are dominion,  subjugation,  creation,  and 
command;  the Heavens  are rolled in His right hand and created  things are 
constrained  by His hand. He is Unique  in creating  and inventing;  He is alone  in 
bringing  into existence  and innovating.  He created  all creatures  and their deeds,  
and decreed  their sustenance  and their lives; nothing  preordained  escapes  His 
hand and the mutations  of things  are not beyond  His power.  What  He decrees  is 
beyond  calculation  and What  He knows  has no end.
3- Knowledge:  We bear witness  that He knows  all things  which  knowledge  
implies,  encompasses  all that happens  from the limits of earth to the highest  of 
the heavens;  not an atom's  weight  in the earth or in Heaven  is beyond  His 
knowledge,  therefore,  He knows  the creeping  of the black ant upon the solid  
rock in the darkest  night,  and He learns  the motion  of the molecule  in the midst  
of the air. He knows  the secrets  and that which  is more  shrouded  in secrecy;  He 
has knowledge  of the suggestions  of the minds,  the movements  of the thoughts,  
and the concealed  things of the inmost  by virtue of a knowledge  which is 
eternally  ancient  by which  He is persistently  described  through  the ages, not by a 
renewed  and acquired  knowledge  which arises in His Essence  through  
experience.
4- Will:  We bear  witness  that He is the Wilier  of all things  that are, the Master


Page 181:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds
and Disposer  of all originated  things:  nothing  happens,  whether  in the dominion  
of visible  or unseen,  no matter  meager  or abundant  small  or great,  good  or evil, 
of use or disadvantage,  belief  or unbelief,  knowledge  or ignorance,  success  or 
failure,  increase  or decrease,  obedience  or disobedience,  unless  it is by His Will.  
What  He wills is and what  He does not will is not: there  is not a glance  of the eye 
nor a stray thought  of the heart but that it is subject  to His will. He is the 
originator  of creadon,  the Restorer  of creadon,  the Doer  of whatever  He wills.  
There  is none  that cancels  His command,  none  that enhances  His decrees.
There  is no way for a servant  to flee away  from  disobeying  Him,  unless  it is by 
His help and mercy,  and none has power  to obey Him unless  it is by His will. If 
men and jinns, angels  and devils gather  to move or to render  still an atom's  
weight  in the world,  without  His will, surely  they would  fail. His will exists  in His 
essence  as one of His attributes,  by which He is persistendy  described  from  
eternity,  the Wilier,  in His infinity,  of the existence  of things  at their appointed  
dme which  He has decreed.  So they come  into existence  just at their appointed  
times  even as He has willed  in His infinity  without  precedence  of sequence.  They  
come to pass in accordance  with His knowledge  and will without  variation  or 
change.  He does not direct  things  through  arrangement  of thought  and awaiting  
the passage  of time, and this is why one thing does not distract  Him from  
another.
5- Hearing  and Seeing:  We bear testimony  that He is All-Hearing,  All- 
Seeing.  He hears  and sees all things  in such a way that no audible  thing,  however  
faint  is beyond  His hearing,  and no visible  thing,  however  minute,  is hidden  from  
His sight.  Distance  does not hinder  His hearing,  nor does darkness  obstruct  His 
seeing.  He sees without  eyes and hears without  ears in the same way as He 
perceives  without  a mind, grips without  a hand, and creates without  an 
instrument,  since His attributes  are, in no way, similar  to these  of created  things,  
just as His essence  is, by no means,  similar  to the essence  of created  things.
6- Speech:  We bear witness  to the fact that He speaks,  commanding,  
forbidding,  promising,  and threatening,  with a speech  which  is eternal,  ancient,  
and self-existing,  unlike  the speech  of created  things,  it is not a sound  which  is 
caused  by the passage  of air or the friction  of bodies,  nor is it a letter  which  is 
pronounced  by the movement  of the lips and tongue.  We bear testimony  to the 
fact that the Qur'an,  the Bible, the Gospel,  and the Psalms  are His books  
revealed  to His Messengers,  that the Qur'an  is recited  by the tongue,  written  
down  in copies,  and preserved  in the heart.  Nevertheless  it is eternally  ancient,  
subsisting  in the essence  of Allah,  not subject  to division  and separation  by its 
being  transmitted  to the heart  and (transcribed  on) leaves.  We bear witness  to 
the fact that Moses  heard  the speech  of Allah  with no sound  nor word,  just as 
the righteous  will see the essence  of Allah in the hereafter,  with no substance  
nor accident.  As long as He has all of these qualities,  He is living,  knowing,  
willing,  hearing,  seeing  and speaking  with life, power,  knowledge,  will, hearing,  
seeing,  and speech,  not only through  the Essence.
7- Acts: we bear witness  to the fact that there is no entity  besides  Him,179


Page 182:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
except  that it originates  by His Action  and proceeds  from His Justice,  in the 
most  beautiful  and perfect  and complete  and just of ways.  We bear testimony  
to the fact that He is wise in His actions,  just in His Commandments;  and in 
way could His Justice  be comparable  with that of men, since prejudice  
might  be expected  from the latter  in his dealing  with the property  of anyone  
else other  than him, but in no way could  injustice  be expected  from  Allah,  for 
as long as He does not encounter  any property  of another  besides  Him,  He is 
not unfair  in his dealing  with it. Everything  besides  Him, men and jinns,  
angels  and devils,  Heaven  and earth, animals,  plants,  and inanimate  things,  
substance  and accident,  as well as things perceived  and things felt, are all 
originated  and created  by His power  from nothing  and made from naught,  
since He existed  in eternity  by Himself  and there  was none along  with Him.  
So He originated  the creation  thereafter  just to demonstrate  his Power  and 
realize  such of His Will as had preceded  and such of His word as existed  in 
eternity,  not because  He had any need or necessity  for it.
We bear testimony  to the fact that He is Generous  in creating,  inventing  and 
enjoining  obligations,  which He has not done by necessity,  and that He is 
gracious  in beneficence  and reform,  which  he has not done because  of any need.  
His are generosity  and kindness,  beneficence  and grace,  since  He is able to bring  
upon  His creatures  all ways of torture  and to shower  upon  them  all kinds  of pain  
and affliction,  and should  He even do this, it would  be out of His Justice,  and not 
out of wickedness  nor of tyranny.  He rewards  His believing  servants  for their acts 
of obedience  out of His Generosity  and encouragement  rather than in 
accordance  with their merit  and desert.  For in no way is He under  obligation  to 
anyone  and injustice  is not expected  from Him. Furthermore,  none  has any claim  
against  Him. His claim  to obedience  is obligatory  and binding  upon  all creatures  
because  He enjoined  it upon them on the tongues  of His prophets  and not by 
reason  alone. But He sent His aposdes  and demonstrated  their truthfulness  by 
way of explicit  miracles  and they conveyed  His commands  and prohibitions,  His 
promises  and threats.  So it became  obligatory  upon  all creatures  to have faith in 
what  they brought.
The Meaning  Of The Second  Word  Of The Testimony
The second  word  of the testimony  is that which  affirms  the Aposdeship  to all 
the Prophets  and Messengers  "Peace  be upon them",  and asserts  the fact that 
Allah Almighty  sent the unlettered  Quraishi  Prophet  Muhammad  "Allah ’s 
blessing  and peace  be upon  him",  as a Messenger  to all the Arabs  and non-Arabs,  
to both jinns  and men.  By his law He abrogated  all the previous  laws, except  such  
of them as He confirmed.  He gave him preference  over all other  prophets  and 
made Him the chief of mankind,  and rendered  incomplete  such of faith as 
affirms  only the Allah's  Oneness,  i.e. “There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but 
Allah ” unless  it is followed  by the testimony  to the aposdeship  of the Prophet  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him",  i.e. that Muhammad  is the Messenger  
of Allah.180
no
:


Page 183:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds
Moreover,  he made  it obligatory  upon  all the creatures  to have faith in him, in 
all the things which  he related  (from his Lord) concerning  the affairs  of this 
world  and the hereafter,  in such a way that He will not accept  the faith of any 
creature  until he believes  in that which  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon  him" related  concerning  these  which  will happen  after death,  
the first of which  is the question  of Munkar  and Nakir.  These  are two awful  and 
terrible  creatures  who will make  the dead one sit up in the grave,  both soul and 
body and will ask him about the Allah's  Oneness  and about the Aposdeship,  
saying:  “Who  is your  Lord?  What  is your  religion?  Who  is your  Messenger? ” They  
the two trial-causers  of the grave  and their questions  are the first trial one will 
encounter  after  death.
One should  have faith in the punishment  of the grave  and that it is real and 
that His Commandment  pertaining  to the body  and soul is just and in accordance  
with His will.
He should  have faith in the balance  of acts and deeds  with both its scales  and 
tongue,  the magnitude  of which  is like the firmaments  of the Heavens  and the 
earth,  in which  the deeds  are weighed  by the power  of Allah  Almighty,  and its 
weights  will be as minuscule  as atoms  and mustard-seeds,  in establishment  of 
exact  justice.  The records  of the good deeds  will be placed  in a good manner  in 
the scale of light, by which  the balance  will be weighed  down  according  to the 
measure  of their degrees  in the Sight  of Allah  and by His grace,  while  the records  
of the evil deeds  will be displayed  in an ugly manner  in the scale of darkness,  by 
which  the balance  will be light by virtue  of Allah's  Justice.
One should  also have faith in the bridge  and that it is real: it is a bridge  
stretched  over Hell, sharper  than the sword's  edge  and finer than a hair, on which  
the feet of the unbelievers  slip, according  to the Commandment  of Allah,  and 
they fall into the Fire, whilst  the feet of the faithful  believers  stand firm, by the 
grace  of Allah,  and thus they will be made  to pass into the eternal  abode  and the 
everlasting  life.
One should  also have faith in the frequented  fount-lake,  i.e. the tank of 
Muhammad,  from  which  the faithful  believers  will drink  before  being  admitted  to 
the Garden  and after having  crossed  the bridge. Whoever  gets a single sip 
therefrom  will never  become  thirsty  again.  Its width  is (as long as is the distance  
which  is covered  in) a month-journey,  its water  is whiter  than milk and sweeter  
than honey,  around  which  there are 
heaven,  into which  flow two canals  which  stem from (the river of) Abundance  
(Kawthar).
One should  also have faith in the reckoning  and the differences  between  men  
concerning  it: some will be directly questioned,  some will be treated  
compassionately  and some will be admitted  to the Garden  with no reckoning,  
and these are
likes about  the conveyance  of His message,  and such of infidels  as He likes about  
their rejection  of the Messengers.  Fie will ask the innovators  about  such of laws  
as they innovated,  and the Muslims  about  their  deeds.181
are
utensils  as numerous  as the stars of the
Allah's  nearest  devotees.  Allah will ask such of Messengers  as He


Page 184:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
One should  also have faith in the fact that the monotheists  will be released  
from the Fire of Hell after retribution  has been exacted  from them so that no 
monotheist  will remain  in the fire of Hell. One should have faith in the 
intercession  of the Messengers,  followed  by the learned  men of knowledge,  
then by the martyrs,  and then by all the faithful  believers,  each according  to 
his dignity  and rank in the Sight of Allah Almighty.  Such of believers  as 
remains  and has no intercessor  will be released  by Allah's  Grace.  That's  
because  no believer  will abide  in the fire of Hell, and whoever  has in his heart  
an atom's  weight  of faith will be brought  out from the fire.
One should  believe  in the excellence  of the holy Companions  with their  
different  ranks,  and that the most excellent  of mankind,  after the Messenger  
of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him",  is Abu Bakr, then Umar,  
then Uthman,  and then Ali "Allah  be pleased  with them".  One should  think  
well of all the Companions  and praise them, just as Allah and His Apostle  
"Peace  be upon  him" praised  them.
All this is narrated  in the Prophetic  traditions  transmitted  from the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" and from his 
Companions.  He who abides  by all this and has faith in it with no suspicion  
will be of the people  of truth and the right Law, and by so doing  will keep  
himself  far from the followers  of error  and the party  of heresy.
We ask Allah  Almighty,  by His mercy,  to make  us perfect  in certainty  of faith  
and steadfast  in religion;  and this we ask for ourselves  and for all the Muslims  
throughout  the world.  Verily,  He is the most  merciful  of those  who are merciful.  
And Allah's blessing  and peace be upon the well-chosen,  His servant  
Muhammad,  our chief  and master.182
CHAPTER  TWO:  ON THE WAY  OF PROGRESSION  TO RELIGIOUS  
INSTRUCTION;  AND  THE SEQUENCE  OF THE STAGES  OF FAITH
It should  be known  that what  we have already  stated  under  the Exposition  of 
the Creed  should  be presented  to the child in his early years  in order  that he may  
memorize  it, and its meaning  will gradually  be uncovered  to him little by little as 
he grows  older.  The first step is to retain  it in memory,  after  which  he will come  
to understand  it, then believe  in it, then attain  certainty  of faith and acceptance,  
and all of this is obtained  during  childhood  without  proof.  It is out of Allah's  
Grace  upon  mankind  that He Almighty  has expanded  his heart  to have faith from  
the very beginning  without  the necessity  of any argument  or proof.  How  can this 
fact be denied  since all the creeds  of the laymen  are based  on pure dictation  and 
simple  approval  on authority  of others?  It is true that a belief  which  results  from  
simple  approval  on authority  of others  may not be free of some  weakness  at the 
beginning,  in the sense  that it can be shaken  and annulled  by its opposite  once it 
is mentioned;  and it is for this that it should  be strengthened  and assured  in the 
heart  of the child and the layman  until  it is well established  and unshakeable.
But even, the way of strengthening  and assuring  it does not lie in learning  the 
art of argumentation  and speculation  so much as it lies in the recitation  and


Page 185:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds  
learning  the interpretation  of the Qur'an,  in the study  of the Prophetic  traditions  
and their meaning,  and in the performance  of religious  duties and acts of 
worship.  Henceforth,  a child ’s belief  continues  to increase  in strength  through  
such of the proofs  and arguments  of the Qur'an  as falls on his ears, such of the 
illustrations  of tradition  and their advantages  as he receives,  such of the lights  of 
the acts of worship  and the fulfillment  of the duties  thereof  as rises upon  him, as 
well as through  watching  the righteous,  sitting  in their company,  listening  to their  
words,  and observing  their mark and manner  in submission  to Allah, feeling  
afraid of Him, and humbling  themselves  before  Him. Such commencement  of 
dictation  are then like the sowing  of the seed in the heart,  while  these  actions  will 
serve to water  and irrigate  the seed until it grows  up and becomes  strong  and 
develops  into a good and firm tree the roots of which  are well grounded  in the 
earth,  and the branches  of which  rise up towards  the sky.
Such listener  should  be stricdy  guarded  as possible  as it could be from  
argumentation  and speculation,  because the damage resulting from  
argumentation  is greater  than reform,  and the resulting  corrupt  is greater  than  
improvement.  Indeed,  the process  of strengthening  the faith of the child through  
argumentation  is like striking  a tree with an iron mallet for the purpose  of 
strengthening  it. Breaking  its limbs in this way will destroy  it, if not damage  it 
fully. Watching  is sufficient  for you in this respect.  If you compare  the creed of 
the righteous  and pious  among  the laymen  with that of the speculators  and those  
given  to argumentation,  you will find that the faith of the layman  is as firm as the 
lofty mountain  which is never moved  either by storm or lightning,  while the 
creed  of the speculator  who guards  his belief  with the syllogisms  of controversy  i? 
like a thread  hanging  in the air, blown  to and fro by the winds.  But, an exceptio  
is made of those who have heard the proof  of faith and have admitted  it Oi 
authority  of others,  just as they have taken  hold of faith itself  and admitted  it on 
authority  of others,  since there  is no difference  as far as approval  on authority  of 
others  is concerned  between  the proof  and the thing proved.  That's because  
learning  the proof  is one thing,  and arriving  at it through  independent  thinking  is 
another.
But if the child is brought  up on this creed  and is to pursue  a worldly  activity  
in order to earn his livelihood,  nothing  beyond  it would be opened  to him,  
though  he would,  in the opinion  of the people  of the truth, be saved in the 
hereafter,  as long as the Law has not enjoined  upon the ruffian  Arabs to do 
anything  more than a verbal  approval  of the literal  meaning  of these creeds.  But 
they are not required  to study,  inquiry,  and bring  out of proofs.  Nevertheless,  if 
he hopes  to be one of the followers  of the way to the hereafter  and be lucky  
enough  to attain  success  in this respect,  so that he could  continue  to act (upon  
his knowledge),  sticking  to piety,  “restraining  his soul from lust",  and be given  to 
self discipline  and self-mortification,  avenues  of guidance  would  be opened  for 
him which  would  disclose  to him the realities  of this creed through  a Divine  
Light cast into his heart by self-mortification,  in fulfillment  of the promise  of 
Allah  Almighty  about  which  He says: "And  he who strives  for us in Our ways  We183


Page 186:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
will guide  them;  for Allah  is assuredly  with those  who do right.”  (Al-Ankabut  69)
4 4)\ 0*3 fr-i ^4? *J•x41*m 0^*3  ^
Verily,  this is the precious  and valuable  gem which  is the ultimate  goal of the 
faith of the saints  and Allah's  nearest  devotees,  to which  the secret  which  rested  
in the bosom  of Abu Bakr  As-Siddiq  and by which  he excelled  all others  referred.  
The revelation  of this secret,  nay, these  secrets,  has different  stages,  in accordance  
with the degree  of self mortification  and the degrees  of the purity  and freedom  of 
the inner  self from anything  other  than Allah  Almighty,  as well as in accordance  
with the attainment  of guidance  by virtue  of the light  of faith.
This is similar to the differences  of men in the comprehension  of the 
mysteries  of medicine,  jurisprudence  and the other sciences,  which vary in 
accordance  with their diligence,  and their true nature  in intelligence  and good  
sense;  and just as the former  variations  are beyond  limitation,  so are the latter.
A question:  If you say that the study of argumentation  and scholastic  
theology  is blameworthy,  like astrology,  or that it is permissible  or commendable,  
then,  you should  know  that in this particular  respect  men go as far in both sides  
as to exceed  the due bounds:  some say that it is an innovation  and thus it is 
unlawful  and that it is better  for the servant  to face his Lord guilty  of any sin, 
apart from the sin of polytheism,  than to meet Him with that of scholasticism;  
and others  say that it is an obligation  whose  duty is either  collective  or binding  
upon everyone,  and that it is the best form of deed and the highest  kind of 
obligation,  in which  there  lies the confirmation  of theology  and the protection  of 
Allah's  religion.  Among  those  who hold it unlawful  are Ash-Shafi'i,  Malik,  Ahmad  
Ibn Hanbal,  Sufyan and all these of sunnah  among  the predecessors  and 
forefathers.
Ibn Abd Al-A ‘la‘ said: “I heard  Ash-Shafi'i  having  said, On the day he was 
debating  with Hafs Al-Fard,  one of the Mu‘tazilites:  ‘It is better  for a servant  
to meet his Lord guilty  of any sin, apart from the sin of polytheism,  than to 
stand before  Him with a bit of scholasticism/  I have also heard Hafs saying  
things  which  I cannot  repeat. ” Ibn Abd Al-A ‘la reported  also that Ash-Shafi'i  
said: “I have discovered  among  the scholastic  theologians  things  which  have  
never  been expected  from them.  It is better  for a servant  to be put to the trial 
of violation  of all of Allah's orders,  with the exception  of the sin of 
polytheism,  than to devote  himself  to scholasticism. ”
Al-Karabisi  narrated  that Ash-Shafi'i  was once asked about something  
belonging  to scholasticism  thereupon  he grew  angry  and said: “Ask Hafs Al-Fard  
and his followers  about  this "Might  Allah dishonour  them". ” When  Ash-Shafi'i  
fell ill, Hafs visited  him and said: “Who am I ?” Ash-Shafi'i  replied:  “You  
Hafs Al-Fard:  Might  Allah  neither  keep nor make  you prosper  until you give up 
your sins.” Ash-Shafi'i  said: “If men but knew whatever  lurks in scholastic  
theology  they would  have fled away from it in the same way as they flee away  
from  a lion.” He added:  “Whenever  I hear a man saying  that the name  is what  is 
named  or something  else other  than what is named,  I bear witness  that he is a184
are


Page 187:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds  
scholastic  theologian  and has no faith. ”
Az-Za £farani narrated  that Ash-Shafi'i  said: "My judgment  concerning  the 
scholastic  theologians  is that they should  be beaten  with palm leaves  and carried  
while being  in that state round  among  the tribes and clans,  with the statement  
that this is the punishment  of those who reject the Qur ’an and the Prophetic  
sunnah,  and rather  address  themselves  to scholastic  theology."
Ahmad  Ibn Hanbal  said: “A scholastic  theologian  never prospers.  You can 
find none having  delved  into scholastic  theology,  but that his heart is corrupt. ” 
He was so strong  in criticizing  it that he abandoned  Al-Harith  Al-Muhasibi,  in 
spite of his asceticism  and godliness,  because  he composed  a work on the 
refutation  of heresy,  telling  him: “Woe to you! Do you not first declare  their  
heretical  beliefs  in order  to be able to reply  to them,  thereby  forcing  men to study  
these  heresies  and consider  these suspicious  matters,  all of which  will draw them  
into speculation  and controversy. ” Ahmad  Ibn Hanbal  also said: "The scholastic  
theologians  are heretics."
Malik  said: “Have  you seen how a theologian  will reject  his religion  for a new  
one everyday  when one of stronger  argument  confronts  him? ” In other  words,  
the position  of the theologians  is changeable.  Malik  also said: "It is impermissible  
to accept  the testimony  of sectarians  and heretics.”  In interpretation  of this, some  
of his friends  said that he meant  by sectarians  the scholastic  theologians,  no 
matter  to what  doctrine  they might  belong.
Abu Yusuf  said: “He who seeks knowledge  through  speculation  will become  
a heretic."  According  to Al-Hassan:  "‘Argue  not with sectarians  nor mix with  
them,  nor hearken  to them."  Thus the traditionists  among  the Forefathers  have  
unanimously  agreed (upon their criticizing  scholastic  theology).  The many  
restrictions  which  came  down  to us from them  are incalculable.  They  have said 
that the companions  did not refrain  from scholastic  theology,  although  they  
were better  informed  and more eloquent  phrase-makers  than anyone  else, but 
because  of their  knowledge  of the resulting  evils. For this reason  the Messenger  
of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "Let the hairsplitters  be 
destroyed!  Let the hairsplitters  be destroyed!  Let the hairsplitters  be destroyed! ” 
By this he meant  those who are excessive  in investigation  and research.  They  
(the earlier  traditionists)  also protested  that had it (scholastic  theology)  been an 
integral  part of religion  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon  him" would  have commanded  (his Companions  to address  themselves  to) 
it, and would  have taught  (them)  its various  ways,  and would  have praised  it and 
commended  its protagonists,  seeing that he taught them abstersion  and 
exhorted  them to study the law of the obligatory  shares of inheritance  and 
commended  (its teachers  and learners).  On the other  hand he forbade  them to 
delve  into divine  decrees  saying:  “Refrain  from speculation  on Divine  decrees. ” 
The holy Companions  continued  to refrain  from such speculations.  To be sure,  
it is unfaithful  and unjust  to add to what the teacher  set forth;  and of a surety,  
the holy Companions  are our teachers  and the example  which we should  
imitate,  and we are their  followers  and disciples.185


Page 188:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
The other  group  protested  that if the dangers  of speculation  result  from such  
terms as essence  and accident  and the other strange  terms with which the 
Companions  were  not familiar,  it would  not be difficult  to explain,  because  there  
is not a branch  of knowledge  but that new terms  have been introduced  therein  
for making  its meanings  more  understandable  , as say, the science  of Hadith,  the 
science  of exegesis,  and the science  of jurisprudence.  Had those people  to 
encounter  such terms as refutation,  invalidation,  composition,  deduction  , and 
false collocation  „ as well as the other  questions  which  are produced  by analogy  
they would  not be able to understand  them.  Therefore  the introduction  of new  
terms to signify  a definite  meaning  is as legal as the invention  of utensils  and 
containers  of new shape  and form  for usage  in permissible  things.
If it is the meaning  of such terms  which  causes  dangers,  we intend  to attain  
through  them  nothing  but the knowledge  of the proofs  for the origination  of the 
universe,  the Allah's  Oneness  of the Creator,  and (the essence  of) His Attributes  
as they have come down to us in the Law. From  which  time, then, has the 
knowledge  of Allah  by proof  been  unlawful?
But if the main concern  should  be with sectarianism,  fanaticism,  sowing  the 
seeds of enmity,  hatred,  and all that speculation  and controversy  give rise, then  
those are unlawful  and should  be avoided,  against  which  it should  be strictly  
guarded,  in the same  way as pride,  conceit,  hypocrisy,  and the desire  for power  
which  the sciences  of Hadith,  exegesis  and jurisprudence  produce  are unlawful  
and should  be avoided,  against  which  it should  be strictly  guarded.  But even,  let 
not that to which  a branch  of knowledge  might  lead prevent  anyone  from  seeking  
that knowledge:  How  should  the mention  of the proof  and the desire  for learning  
and investigating  it be forbidden  in the presence  of Allah's  statement:  "Say: Give  
your  proof  if you speak  the truth ” (Al-Baqarah  111)
oj} ij3iA 1)3$186
40  0^4^
And: “... that he who would  perish  might  perish  by clear  proof,  and he who  
would  live might  live by clear  proof'  (Al-Anfal  42)
i o o* O* Cr4 }
And:  “Do you Have  any authority  for this?” (Yunus  68)
I.e. any evidence  or proof  for this. And: “Say: 'The absolute  evidence  is 
Allah's.'"  (Al-An'am  149)
^ J € ji* ■» t
1 AjthJl 4J13
And: “Have  you not considered  him who disputed  with Abraham  about  his 
Lord,  because  Allah  had given  him dominion?  When  Abraham  said: 'My Lord  is 
He who gives life and death/  he said: 'It is I who give life and death/  Abraham  
said: 'Since  Allah  brings  the sun from  the East, do then bring  it from the West.'  
The unbeliever  was confounded,  for Allah  guides  not the evil doers."  (Al-Baqarah*
I


Page 189:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds 187
258)
i cSA)• ^ c3^JT  ^ jCST jUa‘J3J Jli >
In this quotation,  Allah  Almighty  mentions,  by way of commendation,  the 
controversy  which  broke  up between  Abraham  and his opponent  and how  
Abraham  argued  with and silenced  him. Allah Almighty  says too in this 
context:  "This is our argument  which we granted  Abraham  against  his 
people. ” (Al-An'am  83)
i j?J villjj £
He Almighty  further  says: “They  said: 'O Noah!  Already  have you disputed  
with us, and increased  our disputation.'"  (Hud  32)
4 ((J j) li [hi JaS- Ji £jhj \ji li ^
He also says in the story of Pharaoh:  "Said (Pharaoh):  "And what is the 
'Lord  and Cherisher  of the worlds'?"  (Moses)  said: "The Lord and Cherisher  of 
the heavens  and the earth, and all between,  if you want to be quite sure."  
(Pharaoh)  said to those  around:  "Do you not listen (to what he says)?"  (Moses)  
said: "Your  Lord and the Lord of your fathers  from the beginning!"  (Pharaoh)  
said: "Truly  your messenger  who has been sent to you is a veritable  madman!"  
(Moses)  said: "Lord  of the East and the West, and all between!  If ye only had 
sense!"  (Pharaoh)  said: "If you put forward  any god other  than me, I will certainly  
put you in prison!"  (Moses)  said: "What  if I show you that which  shall be a 
proof  of my mission? ” (Ash-Shu'ara'  23:30)
CjS ifrAy* oj 3 40 (f2p 40 ^5 03^5?  ^
(i jjT oj 4053^0 i© ,^4! Jii
at ' ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ £
05I JL5 1^3 0! Lk^L j L.J 4*5 <£jjp>
43^3'  <3^©  cr? 'Sh*
In short  the Qur ’an, from  its beginning  to its end, is an argument  with the 
unbelievers.
The fundamental  proof  adopted  by theologians  for the Allah's  Oneness  is the 
statement  of Allah  Admighty:  "Had there been in either  (Heaven  or earth)  gods  
besides  Allah,  both  would  have surely  gone  to ruin. ” (Al-Anbiya  22)
4 (^p) li-uLaJ  ajuI 'i/J iii \ [hp3
Their fundamental  proof  for the Aposdeship  lies in His statement:  “And if 
you are in doubt  as to that which  We have sent down to Our servant,  then  
produce  a Surah  like it.” (Al-Baqarah  23)
4 CgJ Cr? ‘prO ij Oj3 ^
Their fundamental  proof  for the resurrection  is: “Say: He shall give life to 
them  who first gave them  life.” (Ya Sin 79)


Page 190:
- The quarter  of the acts of worship
4 ^ J>3 }j* LP >
Thus the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" did 
not cease to argue and dispute  with the unbelievers.  Allah Almighty  says:  
"Dispute  with them  in the kindest  manner.”  (An-Nahl  125)
The Companions,  too, used to argue and dispute  with the unbelievers,  but 
only at the time of need.  At the time of the companions  the need for disputation  
was little.
The first to lay the foundation  of bringing  the innovators  back to the truth by 
means  of argumentation  was Ali Ibn Abu Talib  when  he sent Ibn Abbas  to the 
Khawarij.  Ibn Abbas  argued  with them saying:  “for which  reason  do you have  
hatred  against  your imam? ” They said: “He has fought,  but did get no war 
prisoners  nor booty. ” Ibn Abbas  said: "War  prisoners  and booty  are taken  only in 
war against  unbelievers:  Had A'ishah  been taken as captive  on the Day of the 
Camel  and had fallen to the lot of anyone  of you, would  he have regarded  it 
lawful  to deal with her in the same way as he would  deal with his own property  
(and ignore)  that she is, according  to the expression  of the Qur ’an, your  mother? ” 
They answered  in the negative,  and consequently  two thousand  of them  
surrendered  by virtue  of his argumentation  with them.
It is narrated  that AI-Hassan  once debated  with a Qadarite  with the result  that 
the latter  retracted  from his error.  Ali Ibn Abu Talib "Might  Allah  honour  him"  
once debated  with a Qadarite.  It is narrated  that Abdullah  Ibn Mas'ud  argued  
with Yazid  Ibn Amrah  on the topic  of faith. Abdullah  (Ibn Mas'ud)  said: “If I say 
that I am a believer  it is just like my statement  that I belong  to the inhabitants  of 
the Garden. ” Yazid  Ibn Amrah  said to him: "O Companion  of the Messenger  of 
Allah!  This is but a slip on your part! What  is faith unless  it is to believe  in Allah,  
His angels,  books  and apostles,  as well as in resurrection  and the balance  (of both  
acts and deeds),  to perform  obligatory  prayer,  observe  the obligatory  fasts, and 
practice  regular  charity.  Nevertheless,  we have sins which  we commit,  and if we 
but know  that they would  be plotted  out of us, we would  know  that we will be of 
the inhabitants  of the Garden.  For this reason  we say that we are believers,  but 
we do not say that we belong  to the inhabitants  of the Garden. ” Ibn Mas'ud  
replied:  “By Allah,  you have said the truth:  this is a slip on my part.”
It should  be said that they (the Companions)  did not devote  themselves  but a 
little to that (speculation),  which  they did briefly  and only at the time of need.  
They  did not delve  into it for the purpose  of writing  about  or teaching  it, nor did 
they take it up as a profession.  It is then said that they did not devote  themselves  
to it but a little because  there  was no significant  need for it, since no heresy  had 
appeared  at that time. They  addressed  themselves  to it briefly  because  their only  
purpose  was to silence  the opponent  and force  him to recognize  his error.  Their  
objective  was to reveal  the truth and get rid of suspicious  matters.  Therefore,  had 
the confusion  of the opponent  persisted  or he proved  unrelenting  on his error,188


Page 191:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds  
they would  have prolonged  their argument,  without  reckoning,  as it were, the 
need with weight or measure  once they had entered  into their (debate).  
Furthermore,  they did not undertake  the process  of teaching  and writing  about  it 
for it was their  custom  with regard  to such sciences  as jurisprudence,  exegesis  and 
Hadith.
If it is permissible  to compose  books  on jurisprudence  and to work out rare 
hypothetical  cases which  seldom  happen,  therewith  to get ready for the time of 
need, or simply  to sharpen  the wits, it is also permissible  for us to classify  the 
methods  of argumentation  to get ready for the time of need,  with the rising  of 
suspicious  matters  or the uprising  of an innovator,  or to sharpen  the wits or have  
the argument  ready  perchance  at the time of need  it will be within  the reach  of all, 
as the preparation  of armaments  for war before  the day of battle.
This is all that might  be said about  both parties.  But, if you ask me what I 
think  of this, let me say that the truth of the matter  is that those  who condemn  it 
absolutely  and utterly  and those  who praise  it absolutely  and unconditionally  are 
wrong.  The question  should  be more  carefully  explained  as follows:
It should  be known  that from among  the prohibited  things,  there is firstly  
that, considered  unlawful  in its very nature,  such as wine or (the flesh of the) 
dead. What I mean by ‘its very nature ’ is that the cause of prohibiting  it is a 
quality  inherent  in it: intoxication  (in the case of wine) and putrefaction  (in the 
case of the flesh of the dead).  If we are asked concerning  these two things,  we 
would  not be reluctant  to say that they are absolutely  unlawful,  regardless  of the 
possibility  of making  permissible  the eating  of the flesh of the dead at the time of 
need, or the drinking  of wine when a person  chokes  over a morsel  and finds  
nothing  to swallow  it with other  than  wine.
Secondly  there is, from among  things,  those which may be rendered  
unlawful  for some other reason,  like making  a transaction  in opposition  to 
one's Muslim  brother  during  the period  of choice,  practicing  traffic  during  
Adhan,  or eating  earth which  is rendered  unlawful  because  of its harmful  
effect.  Such things are divided  into those which  are harmful  both in their  
small  or large quantities  and are absolutely  unlawful,  like, say, poison  which  is 
fatal whether  in small or large quantity;  and those which  are harmful  only  
when  taken  in excess  like, say, honey,  which  is harmful  to the feverish  patient  
when it is taken in excess.  The same applies  to eating  earth, nevertheless,  
rendering  wine and eating  earth  absolutely  unlawful,  and honey  lawful  applies  
only to the most  general  cases.
In an event  having  opposing  cases, , it will be far better,  and much  safer from  
falling  into confusion  to be analyzed  independently  and uniquely,  which thus  
brings us back to theology,  to say that it has points of advantage  and 
disadvantage,  merit and harm. As far as its merit is concerned,  whenever  it is 
useful it is either lawful, or commendable,  or obligatory,  as the occasion  
demands.  As far as its harm is concerned,  whenever  it is harmful  it is unlawful.  
Its harm lies in arousing  doubts  and destroying  the creeds  by moving  them out 
from the realm of certitude  and determination.  These things are lost at the189


Page 192:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
beginning  and their restoration  by means  of proof  is doubtful;  and it varies  with  
the difference  of individuals.
Such is its harm in the established  faith. But even, it has another  harmful  
effect which is represented  in setting  firm the belief  of the heretics  in their  
heresies  and installing  them in their hearts  so that their claims  become  stronger  
and they grow  more  obstinate  in their insistence  on them.  But such harm  results  
from  the fanaticism  which  disputation  fires up. For this reason  you see that a lay 
heretic  can, by means  of pleasant  manner,  be easily dissuaded  from his error  
within  a quick  time,  unless  he were brought  up in a town  where  disputation  and 
fanaticism  flourish,  and in this case, if both the foremost  and the last gather  and 
exert  combined  effort  to remove  the heresy  from his heart  they will fail. On the 
contrary,  passion,  fanaticism,  hatred  of the opponents  of debaters  and non­
conformist  groups  possess  his heart  and prevent  him from  grasping  the truth.  So 
even if he were told, "Do you want Allah to remove  for you the veil and to 
disclose  to you, by means  of personal  observation,  that the truth is on the side of 
your opponent?"  he would  dislike  it for fear that his opponent  would  become  
glad because  of it.
This is the chronic  disease  which  has become  widespread  among  men all over  
the land. It is a kind of corruption  inflamed  by the debaters  through  their  
fanaticism.  This is sufficient  for its harm.
As to its benefits  it is thought  that it is of good  benefit  in disclosing  facts and 
knowing  them  as they really  are. But how far from the truth this is, because  the 
fulfillment  of such noble  desire  is beyond  argumentation.  Indeed,  the perplexity  
and confusion  brought  about  by argumentation  prevail  over anything  it might  
disclose  or unfold.  If you were to hear that from a traditionist  or a half-scholar  
you might  think  that they have fallen  victims  of that because  of their ignorance,  
for men are the enemies  of that which  they know  not. Take it from one who is 
well-versed  in speculation,  and, came to abandon  it after a careful  study and a 
thorough  investigation  of it in which  he exceeded  the extremities  of its masters  
and went  further  to study  in great  detail  other  relevant  subjects,  and has become  
sure of the fact that the way to the realities  of knowledge  from this direction  is 
closed.
By my life, argumentation  might be of use in revealing,  unfolding,  and 
clarifying  but a few things,  yet this is very rare and only occurs  in simple  and clear  
matters  which  are readily  understood  even before  going  on any deep study  of the 
art of argumentation.  It has only one benefit:  it preserves  the creed for the 
laymen  and guards  it against  the confusion  of innovators  by different  kinds of 
argumentation.  However,  a layman  is apt to be influenced  by the argument  of the 
innovator  no matter  false the argument  might  be; and to confront  a false position  
with its counterpart  might  repel  it. People  are expected  to follow  this creed  which  
we have  already  mentioned  because  the Law has ordained  it for the good  of their  
lives in this world  and the hereafter,  and because  the righteous  Fathers  agreed  on 
it. The learned  men are expected  to watch over it for the laymen  from the 
ambiguities  of the innovators,  just as the magistrates  are expected  to well-guard190


Page 193:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds -------------------------
their  property  from  the attacks  of the wrongdoers  and ravishers.
Since both its harm and benefit  are clearly  evident,  one should  be like the 
skillful  physician  who is careful  of using dangerous  drugs,  which  he does not 
apply  except  to the right  place  and only at the time of need,  and as much  as it is 
just needed.
To explain  further,  the laymen  and the common  folk who are engaged  in 
crafts  and trades  should  be let alone  in the veracity  of their beliefs  which  they  
have accepted  when  they have been instructed  in the established  faith which  
we have already  stated. To teach them the art of argumentation  and 
disputation  is definitely  harmful  to them since  it might  arouse  doubts  in their  
minds  which  will shake  their faith. Once these doubts  are aroused  it will be 
difficult  to treat their  shaken  faith.
As to the layman  who has faith in a certain  innovation,  he should  be called  
back to the truth by way of thoughtfulness  and delicacy  and not through  
fanaticism:  in other words, through  nice words which have the power to 
convince  the soul and have a positive  effect  on the heart,  words  much  closer  to 
those  of the arguments  of the Qur ’an and the tradition,  mixed  with a few amount  
of admonition  and warning.  This is much  better  than debate  along  the line set 
down  by the scholastic  theologians,  since  the layman,  on hearing  such arguments,  
thinks  that they are a kind of technique  in disputation  which  the disputant  has 
learned  in order  to force  men to adopt  his belief,  so, if the layman  fails to reply  to 
these  arguments  he will assume  that the scholastic  theologians  of his doctrine  ar 
more  capable  of refuting  them.  Disputation  with both this man and the former  
unlawful.  Likewise  it is unlawful  to argue with one who has fallen victim  t 
doubt, since doubt should be removed  by way of thoughtfulness  through  
admonition  and understandable  proofs free of excessive  speculation  and 
continual  debate.
Verily,  argumentation  is of only one benefit,  namely,  when  a layman  has been  
convinced  to believe  in an innovation  by means  of a certain  kind of argument,  in 
which  case it should  be countered  by the same  kind of argument  in order  to bring  
the man back to the truth. This applies  to him who, because  of his liking  of 
disputation,  is no longer  satisfied  with the ordinary  admonitions  and warnings,  
but has reached  such a state of suffering  as from which  nothing  barring  debate  
will heal him. For this reason  it is permissible  to argue  with him. But in a country  
where  heresy  is rare
the creeds  which  we have already  mentioned,  without  any attempt  to take up the 
question  of proofs.  The person  should  wait until something  questionable  arises  
before  he takes up the question  of proofs  which  he should  present  as much  as it 
is required,  and in proportion  with the need.
If the heresy  is Common  and there  is fear that the children  might  be deceived  
by it, there would  be no harm to instruct  them in what is similar  to what  we 
have included  in the book entitled  Ar-Risalah  Al-Qudusiyyah  (The Holy  
Message),  as a means  for adverting  the effect  of the disputations  of innovators  
in case such effect  should  confront  the children.  This is a brief  amount  which191
and only a single  doctrine  prevails,  it is sufficient  to declare


Page 194:
------------- —----------------------------------  The quarter  of the acts of worship
have included  in this book because  of its conciseness.  If he (the child) is 
intelligent  enough  and well-aware  of a certain  question  or falls skeptic  of 
something  in his mind,  then the dangerous  disease  has appeared  and its trouble  
has become  visible.  In this case, there will be no harm to promote  him (the 
child) to what is similar  to the amount  which  we have included  in the book  
entided  Al-Iqtisad  Fi Al-I'tiqad  (The Economy  In Faith),  nearly  fifty folios  in 
which  there is no departures  from the foundations  of the creeds  to the other  
investigations  of the scholastic  theologians.
Should  this satisfy  him (the child) he might be let alone; otherwise,  the 
disease has become  chronic,  its trouble aggravated,  and the epidemic  
widespread.  Let the physician  be as thoughtful  and tactful  as possible,  and let 
him await the will of Allah until, by virtue of His Grace,  the truth shall be 
disclosed  to the child. Otherwise  he will persist  in his doubt  and skepticism  as 
long  as it is so ordained.
It is from this amount  contained  in that book  and its like that benefit  can be 
expected.  The books  which  deal with anything  other  than this are of two kinds:
The first deals with things  other  than the foundations  of the creeds,  such as 
those  which  discuss  propensities,  transmutations,  and perceptions,  or discoursing  
on vision:  whether  it has or has not opposite  which  is called obstruction  or 
blindness,  and in case this obstruction  exists,  then it will be an obstruction  (which  
hinders  the eye) from (seeing)  all invisible  things,  or affirmation  of proof  of 
obstruction  for every  visible  thing  that can be seen, in proportion  to its number,  
in addition  to other  misleading  nonsense.
The second  is concerned  with an additional  expansion  of the same  arguments  
in their application  to other subjects,  with further  questions  and answers,  i.e. 
details  which  add nothing  but more  perplexity  and ignorance  to him who has not 
already  been satisfied  with the previous  amount.  For many  are the things  which  
turn to be more  abstruse  with dilation  and expansion.
If one says that the investigation  into the rules of perceptions  and propensities  
is of a great  use for whetting  the mind  which  is the instrument  of religion  just as 
the sword  is the instrument  of holy war, and consequently  there is no harm in 
whetting  it, it will be like saying  that since playing  chess  whets  the mind,  it is a 
part of religion.  This is out of madness  because  the mind may be whetted  
through  the other  sciences  of Law in which  there  is no fear of harm  or injury.
In this way, you know the amount  of scholastic  theology  which is 
blameworthy  and that which  is praiseworthy,  the conditions  under  which  it is 
condemned  and these under which it is praised,  and the persons  who might  
benefit  from  it and the persons  who might  be harmed.
A question:  If you say that 'since you admit  the need for it in refuting  the 
arguments  of the innovators,  and since  innovations  have  now risen  and calamities  
have become  widespread,  the need for it has become  urgent,  undertaking  this 
science should inevitably  become  a collective  duty, just as taking up the 
protection  of property  and other  rights  and fulfillment  of the duties  of justice  and 
government  and their like. Furthermore,  unless the learned men address192
we


Page 195:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds
themselves  to disseminating  and teaching  this science  and making  investigations  
in it, it will not survive,  and if it were entirely  left, it would  vanish.  To be sure,  
there is no sufficient  capability,  in human  nature  by itself, of overcoming  the 
suspicious  matters  of innovators  unless  this topic is learnt  and studied.  For this 
reason,  it should  be taught,  and investigation  into it is now one of the collective  
duties,  which  was not customary  at the time of the Companions  when  there  was 
no urgent  need for it.'
It should  be known  to you that the truth  in which  there  is no doubt  is that in 
every  town, there should  be somebody,  who would  undertake  this science  and 
address  himself  to it, in order  to refute  the suspicious  matters  of the innovators  
which  are in circulation  in such town.  This undertaking  should  be accomplished  
by way of education,  but it is not right  to be taught  to the laymen  in the same  way 
as the sciences  of jurisprudence  and exegesis  are taught  to them.  That's  because  
this (argumentation)  is like drugs,  and jurisprudence  is like food: the harm of 
food is not dangerous  but the harm of drugs is dangerous  as we have already  
mentioned.
This science  should  not be taught  but to men who have the following  three  
characteristics:  The first is wholehearted  devotion  to and passion  for knowledge:  
for the working  man is detained  by his work  from mastering  the subject  in full as 
well as from removing  the doubts  when they arise. The second  is shrewdness,  
intelligence,  and eloquence,  because  the stupid  one gets no advantage  from his 
understanding  and the dull one gains  nothing  from his argument:  on the contrary  
such a man is more  apt to be harmed  by disputation  and expects  no good  from  it. 
The third is that the man should,  by nature,  be righteous,  religious,  and pious:  he 
should  not be possessed  by passions,  because  the wicked  man would  deviate  
from religion  on his feeling  of the least suspicion.  Furthermore,  passions  would  
eliminate  all preventions  and remove  the barrier  which  stands  between  him and 
worldly  pleasures.  He would  not be keen on driving  out anything  questionable,  
but rather  would  seize upon it to free himself  from any obligation.  The things  
which  such a student  will spoil would  be greater  than those which he would  
reform.
When  you know these divisions  you would  realize  that, in disputation  the 
praiseworthy  argument  is like those of the Qur'an:  kind words  which  influence  
the hearts and convince  the minds without  going deeply  into syllogisms  and 
analyses  which  most  people  do not understand;  and even  if they understand  them  
they render  them trickeries  and artifices  which  their advocate  has learnt  in order  
to make things  abstruse.  Should  he be confronted  by one of his professional  
colleagues  he would  resist  him.
You also know  that Ash-Shafi'i  and all the forefathers  were forbidden  from  
delving  into disputation  as their  main concern  , because  of the harm  inherent  in it 
to which  we have already  referred.  The reports  of Ibn Abbas's  argumentation  
with the Khawarij  and Ali's concerning  free will show that their disputation  
belonged  to the clear and evident  kind, done only at the time of need. Such  
disputation  is praiseworthy  in all cases. Verily,  the need for disputation  varies193


Page 196:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 194
with the time,  and this applies  to the rule which  governs  it.
Such is die rule of the creed  which  Allah  imposed  on man and the method  of 
defending  and preserving  it.
As to dispelling  doubts,  revealing  truths,  knowing  things  as they really  are, and 
comprehending  the mysteries  which  the words  of this creed signify,  there is no 
way to attain  any of them  except  by means  of self-mortification  and overcoming  
passions,  seeking  Allah  wholeheartedly  and persisting  in thoughts  which  are free 
from the defects  of disputation.  They  are a mercy  from  Allah  which  comes  only  
to those who expose  themselves  to its beneficence  according  to what Allah  
ordained  to them  and the extent  to which  they had exposed  themselves  to it as 
well as the capacity  of their hearts  and the degree  of their purity.  This is the sea 
whose  depth  cannot  be reached,  and whose  water  can not be traversed.
A question:  If you say that this discussion  refers to the fact that these  
sciences  have external  as well as internal  meanings  some of which  are obvious  
and understandable  at the first glance,  while others are hidden  and become  
gradually  evident  by means  of self-mortification,  self-discipline,  solemn  desire,  
pure thinking  and a heart  which  is wholly  devoted  to what  is sought  for, and of 
course  this is almost  contrary  to the Law since the Law does not have external  
and internal  meanings,  secret  and manifest,  but the external  and the internal,  the 
secret  and the manifest  in it are all the same, then you should  know that the 
classification  of these sciences  into hidden  and obvious  is not denied  by anyone  
of true insight  but is denied  only by those short of knowledge,  who have  
obtained  some knowledge  in their youth,  at which  they stopped  and made no 
further  advance  and consequently  failed  to promote  to the lofty  heights,  where  lie 
the high ranks  of the learned  men and saints.
This is clear from the indications  of the Law. The Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "Verily  the Qur ’an has an 
external  as well as internal  meaning,  a scope as well as a point. ” Ali said,  
pointing  to his breast:  "Verily  herein  lies abundant  knowledge;  would  that there  
were carriers  to (comprehend  and) transmit  it.” The Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "We assembly  of prophets  were  
commanded  to communicate  with everyone  in proportion  to his faculty  of 
understanding. ” He further  said: “No one has ever recited  a tradition  to a 
people  which  their minds  have failed to understand  but that it is a cause of 
temptation  for them. ” Allah  Almighty  says: “These  similitudes  do We set forth  
to men, which  none understands  except  those endued  with knowledge."  (Al- 
Ankabut  43)
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said:  
"Verily  of knowledge  there  is that which  is like a well-guarded  thing,  which  none  
perceives  but those  who are endued  with  knowledge  of Allah  Almighty..."  to the 
end of the Hadith  as we have narrated  it in the Book  of Knowledge.  He further  
said: “If you only know  what  I know,  you would  laugh  little and weep  much. ” If


Page 197:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds  
this had not been a secret  which  he was forbidden  to disclose  to them because  
the minds  were short of grasping  it, why then did he not divulge  it to them,  
putting  in consideration  that they would have surely believed  him had he 
mentioned  it?
In his comment  on the statement  of Allah Almighty  “It is Allah who has 
created  seven  heavens  and as many  earths;  the (divine)  command  comes  down  
among  them"  (At-Talaq  12)
i ® Crr* 0*3 <3^- }
Ibn Abbas  said: "Had  I told you its interpretation,  you would  have stoned  me 
to death ” or " you would  have said: 'He is a blaspheme'”  according  to another  
narration.  Abu Hurairah  said: "I have retained  from the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" two things,  one of which I have  
divulged,  and had I to divulge  the other,  this throat  (of mine)  would  be cut off.” 
The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "It is not 
by more fasting  nor by much prayer  that Abu Bakr has excelled  you, but by a 
secret  which  rested  in his bosom. ” There  is no doubt  that this secret  was attached  
with the foundations  of the creeds  and not departed  from it. However,  what  
belonged  to the foundations  of religion  could not have been hidden  from the 
other  Companions  through  its outward  form.
Sahl At-Tastari  said: "The learned  man possesses  three kinds of knowledge:  
exoteric  knowledge  which he conveys  to these of what is exoteric;  esoteric  
knowledge  which  he cannot  reveal  but to its own people;  and a knowledge  which  
stands  between  him and His Lord  and which  he cannot  disclose  to anyone. ” One  
of the Gnostics  said: " To divulge  the secret  of Lordship  is (as sinful  as is the) 
unbelief.”  Another  said: "Lordship  has a secret,  and if it is revealed,  Prophethood  
will become  invalid;  Prophethood  has a secret,  and if it is disclosed,  knowledge  
will become  pointless;  and the learned  men of Allah have a secret,  and if it is 
divulged,  the law will become  ineffective. ” If he who said this did not imply  the 
uselessness  of Prophethood  as far as the feeble-minded  are concerned  because  of 
their failure  to understand,  then  what  he said is wrong.  Rather,  what  is true is that 
in which  there  is no contradiction.  The perfect  man is he whose  knowledge  does  
not destroy  his piety,  and the way to attain  piety  is Prophethood.
A question:  If you say: "These  verses  and traditions  may be subject  to several  
interpretations.  Show us, then, how their exoteric  meaning  differs from the 
esoteric,  for if the esoteric  is contradictory  to the exoteric,  it will make  invalid  the 
Law, which  is the situation  of those  who say that reality  is contrary  to the Law,  
and of a surety,  this is clear  unbelief  because  the Law represents  the exoteric  and 
reality  represents  the esoteric.  If the one is neither  contradictory  nor dissimilar  to 
the other,  then both  are the same  so, the division  (of knowledge  into exoteric  and 
esoteric)  will be of no use and the Law  will have  no secret  meaning  which  should  
not be disclosed.  But, both  the hidden  and the evident  will be identical. ”
It should  then be known  to you that this question  gives  rise to a serious  matter  
and leads to the science  of Revelation  which  is an essential  departure  from the195


Page 198:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
purpose  of the science  of practical  religion  which  is the topic  of these  books.  The  
creeds  which  we have already  mentioned  are included  within  the deeds of the 
heart  which  we are required  to admit  with consent,  by setting  the heart firm on 
and sticking  to them, not by striving  to grasp their realities,  since this is not 
binding  upon  all people.  Had it not been an integral  part of practical  religion  we 
would  not have mentioned  it in this book, and had is not been one of the 
external  deeds  of the heart  we would  not have mentioned  it in the first half  of the 
book.196
The true revelation  is characteristic  of the essence  of the heart  and its inward  
part. But should  the discourse  lead to arousing  doubt  or the shadow  of doubt  as 
to the disagreement  of the exoteric  with the esoteric,  it will be then necessary  to 
present  a brief  explanation.  For he who says that reality  disagrees  with the Law  
and the esoteric  contradicts  the exoteric  is closer  to unbelief  than to belief.  In 
fact, the secrets  whose  comprehension  is unique  to Allah's  nearest  devotees  
whose  practice  is restricted  to them apart from the majority  and which  they do 
not divulge  to the audience  may be divided  into five categories:
The first category  is that the thing  in itself  is subtle  and beyond  the faculty  of 
understanding  of most  minds.  This means  that its comprehension  is restricted  to 
the elite who should  not divulge  it to those  who have no power  to understand  it 
lest it becomes  a source of distress  to them in case their minds fail to 
comprehend  it or to perceive  the concealed  secrets  of the spirit,.  The Messenger  
of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" himself  refrained  from  
explaining  this part. That is because  minds fail to grasp its reality and the 
imaginations  are short of perceiving  its truth. But think not that this was not 
disclosed  to the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him",  
for he who does not know  the spirit does not know  himself,  and he who does  
not know himself  does not know  his Lord. It is not improbable  that this was 
disclosed  to many  saints  and learned  men even though  they were not prophets.  
But they exercised  themselves  in the etiquette  of the Law  and kept silent  from  the 
matters  of which  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon  
him" himself  was silent.
Indeed,  the attributes  of Allah  have many  hidden  ones which  are beyond  the 
faculty  of understanding  of the audience.  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon him" mentioned  nothing  of them except  those that 
are evident  to the minds,  such as knowledge  and power  and their  like, which  men  
understand  in terms  of something  of the same kind they have and then suppose  
that they are able to perceive  them through  their own knowledge  and power,  
putting  in consideration  that they have such qualities  as are called  knowledge  and 
power.  Thus,  they arrive  at that by means  of analogy.  But had the Messenger  of 
Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" mentioned  some  of the attributes  
of Allah of which men have no like and which are similar,  even a little, to 
anything  they have, they would  not have understood  them.  Thus,  if the pleasure  
of sexual  intercourse  is mentioned  to the child or to the impotent,  it will not be 
understood  by them except  in terms of the pleasure  of eating which they■
'


Page 199:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds  
understand,  even though  this kind of understanding  is not obtained  from real 
experience.
However,  the difference  between  Allah ’s knowledge  and power  and human  
knowledge  and power is so much greater  than the difference  between  the 
pleasure  of sexual  intercourse  and the pleasure  of eating.  In short,  man has no 
power  to understand  but himself  and his own attributes  inherent  to him at 
present  or in the past. By comparison  and analogy  with these he comes to 
understand  the attributes  of others.  He will also realize  that there is a difference  
between  his attributes  and those  of Allah  in nobleness  and perfection.  Therefore  
it is not within  the power  of men but to ascribe  to Allah  what  has been  attributed  
to himself,  such as action,  knowledge,  and power  as well as other  attributes,  and 
to acknowledge  that in the case of Allah they are more  perfect  and more noble.  
The most part of his emphasis  would  be on his own attributes  rather  than on 
those  of majesty  which  belong  absolutely  to Allah  Almighty.
For this reason  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" said: "I could  not reckon  Your  Praises  as they should  be, for You are really  
praised  just in the same  way as You have praised  Yourself. ” This does not refer  
to the failure  to express  what  I comprehend  so much  as it is rather  an admission  
of the failure  to comprehend  the essence  of the majesty  of Allah. So, someone  
said: “No one has truly known  Allah  except  Allah  Himself.”  Abu Bakr  As-Siddiq  
said: "Praise  be to Allah  who has given  men no way to know  Him except  through  
their failure  to know  Him. ” Let us now desist  from this kind of discourse  and 
rather  return  to the main topic,  namely  that one of these categories  constitutes  
that which the minds fail to understand,  such as the spirit and some of the 
attributes  of Allah  Almighty.
Perhaps  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him"  
referred  to something  alike when  he said: "Verily  Allah  has seventy  veils of light.  
Had He removed  them, the majesty  of His face would have burnt everyone  
whose  sight  might  happen  to perceive  His glory. ”
The second  category  of those  hidden  matters  which  Prophets  and the saints  
refuse to mention  or divulge  implies  those things which,  being intelligible  in 
themselves  and the minds do not fail to understand,  will be harmful  to most  
hearers  if they are mentioned  although  not harmful  to the Messengers  and saints.  
The mystery  of the Divine  decree  which the learned  men were forbidden  to 
divulge  belongs  to this part. So, it is not improbable  that certain  truths  may be 
harmful  to some  people  just as the light of the sun is harmful  to the eyes of bats  
and the rose perhime  is harmful  to black  beetles.  How could  this be considered  
differendy  when  we know  that our statement  that unbelief,  adultery,  sin, and evil 
exist all by the will of Allah,  which  in itself  is true, but even,  it has been harmful  
to some people  who were moved  to have the false impression  to use it as an 
evidence  for folly, recklessness,  and approval  of evil and wickedness?  In this way  
Ar-Rawandi,  as well as several  separatists,  have deviated  from the right path by 
following  such heresies.
Similarly,  if the secret  of the Divine  decree  were disclosed,  the majority  of197


Page 200:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
people  would  imagine  (even falsely)  that Allah is lacking  in power,  because  
their minds  are short  of comprehending  anything  which  should  remove  that  
false impression.  On the other hand, if someone  talks about the day of 
Judgement  arguing  that it will come  after  a thousand  years,  or a few years  after  
or before,  his statement  would  be understood.  But even, the appointed  time  
of the day of Judgement  has not been made known  for the interest  of men  
and for fear of any resulting  harm. The interval  may be long and the 
appointed  time very far, with the result  that people  would  become  careless  
and heedless,  putting  in mind that the time of punishment  and retribution  is 
still very far, even though  it might  be, in Allah's  knowledge  close  at hand.,  On 
the other hand, if the appointed  time is made known,  people  would be 
severely  frightened  with the result that they would  neglect  their works  and 
deals and the world  would  be vulnerable  to ruin. Had this to happen  as such  
and come  true,  it would  be exemplary  of this category.
The third  category  applies  to such  of things  as will be understood  causing  no 
harm in the case it is mentioned  clearly,  although  it is referred  to by way of 
metaphor  or allegory  perchance  it should  have stronger  and deeper  effect  on the 
heart  of the listener.  Its importance  is as far as it leaves  a greater  impression  on 
the heart.
Thus if a person  had said that he had seen a man placing  pearls  around  the 
necks  of swine  and his words  were  taken  metaphorically  to express  the conveying  
knowledge  to, and disseminating  learning  among  those  who are unworthy,  the 
(ordinary)  listener  would  readily  understand  its literal  meaning  while  the thorough  
and careful  listener,  when  he examines  and finds that the man had no pearls  and 
was not surrounded  by swine,  would  see through  and comprehend  the inner  and 
esoteric  meaning.  Consequently  men differ  in this respect.  An example  of this 
kind of speech  is the following:  A weaver  and a tailor  toil On either  side of Spica  
Virginis:  one is weaving  shrouds  for the dead, The other fashions  swaddling  
clothes.
The poet expressed  the celestial  phenomena  of the rising  of the stars and their  
setting  metaphorically  through  the parable  of two artisans.
This kind of (metaphor)  belongs  to the principle  of expressing  a certain  
meaning  through  a picture  which contains  the same meaning  or a similar  
meaning.
Belonging  to the same kind are the words  of the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon him" when  he said: "Verily  the mosque  will shrink  
when  people  spit on its courtyard  just as the piece of skin will shrink  when  it is 
placed  over the fire.” You can readily  understand  that the courtyard  of the 
mosque  does not actually  shrink  when  people  spit on it. What  the words  of the 
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" really  mean  is that 
the atmosphere  of the mosque,  being honoured  and exalted, has been  
dishonoured  and belittled  by spitting,  which  is as opposed  to the idea of the 
mosque  as fire is to the integrity  of the particles  of skin. Belonging  to the same  
kind are the words  of the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon198
?


Page 201:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds 199
him" when  he said: "Is he who raises  his head from prostration  before  the imam  
not afraid that Allah will transform  his head into that of a donkey? ” This,  
however,  will never  take place  literally  but only metaphorically  since the head of 
the donkey  is proverbial,  not for its form and shape,  but for its characteristic  
stupidity  and foolishness.  Thus,  whoever  would  raise his head from prostration  
before  the imam,  his head would  become  like that of a donkey  in stupidity  and 
foolishness.  It is this which  is meant  and not the shape  which  the literal  meaning  
(of the words)  indicates.  For it is utterly  foolish  to place following  the imam  and 
preceding  him together  because  they are contradictory.  The knowledge  that, in 
such cases,  there  are inner  meanings  which  differ  from the outward  significations,  
can only be determined  by either  rational  or legal evidence.  The rational  is when  
any interpretation  according  to the outward  meaning  is impossible,  as in the 
words  of the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" when  
he said: "The  heart  of the believer  lies between  two of the fingers  of the Merciful  
(Allah). ” When  we examine  the hearts  of the believers  we shall not find them  
surrounded  with fingers,  and consequently  we shall know  that the words  are used  
metaphorically  for power  which  is inherent  in figures  and constitutes  their  hidden  
life. Furthermore,  power  was metaphorically  represented  by the fingers  because  
such a metaphor  conveys  the idea of power  more  completely.  Of the same kind is 
the instance  where  Allah expresses  the idea of His power  metaphorically  by 
saying,  “Our words  to a thing  when  We will it is but to say, ‘Be/ and it is." (An-  
Nahl  40):
i © o& & Uyb of "iij ‘CM uy> ilij >
The outward  meaning  of this verse is not possible  because  if the saying  of 
Allah  ‘Be’ was addressed  to the thing  before  that thing  came  into existence,  then  
it would  simply  be an impossibility  since the non-existent  does not understand  
address  and, therefore,  can not obey. And if it was addressed  to the thing  after  
the thing  has come  into existence,  then it would  be superfluous,  since  the thing  is 
already  in existence  and does not need  to be brought  into being.  But whereas  this 
metaphor  has been more  impressive  upon  the minds  in conveying  the idea of the 
greatest  power,  recourse  has been  made  to it.
Those  cases where the inner meaning  is determined  by means  of legal  
evidence  are the cases  which  can be interpreted  according  to their literal  and 
outward  signification,  but, on the authority  of tradition,  a meaning  other  than  
the outward  was intended,  as is the case in the interpretation  of the words  of 
Allah  when  he said: "He sends down the water  from Heaven:  then flow the 
torrents  in their  due measure,  and the flood  bears  along  a swelling  foam. ” (Ar-  
Ra'd 17)
«£ *u IoJ  L-j 1 ^^7  jA jjjjl
Here the word  water  stands  for the Qur ’an which  the torrents  represent  the 
hearts.  Some  of the hearts  receive  and hold much;  others  receive  much  and hold  
little;  while  others  still receive  much  and hold nothing  at all. The foam  represents


Page 202:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
unbelief  and hypocrisy,  which,  although  it rises to and floats  upon  the surface  of 
the water,  does not last; but guidance  which  benefits  men,  endures.  Into this part 
a group  of men went  deeply  and interpreted  the things  which  were mentioned  in 
connection  with the hereafter,  such as the balance,  the bridge,  and the like. All 
this, however,  is innovation  because  it was not handed  down by tradition,  
especially  since  its literal  and outward  interpretation  is not impossible.  Therefore  
it should  be interpreted  literally.
The fourth  category  is where  man comprehends  the thing  in a general  way 
and then through  further  investigation  and experimentation,  he understands  its 
particulars  so that it becomes  a part of him. Thus the two kinds of knowledge  
differ.  The first, (i.e. the general)  resembles  the husks,  while the second  (i.e. the 
particular),  resembles  the pith. The first is the exoteric  or outward,  the second  is 
the esoteric  or inward.  This  is just like the example  of the man who sees a person  
in the dark or from a distance  and acquires  a certain  picture  of that person.  But 
when  he sees him from a close range  or after the darkness  is gone, he realizes  
certain  differences  (between  this second  picture  and the first). This last picture,  
however,  is not opposed  to the first but complementary  to it. The same  is true of 
knowledge,  faith, and belief. For a man may believe  in the existence  of love,  
sickness,  and death even before  any of them occur. But to believe  in their  
existence  after they have taken place is more complete  than believing  in their  
existence  before  they take place.
In fact man has, with regard to passion  and love as well as the other  
conditions,  three different  stages  and three distinct  degrees  of comprehension.  
The first is to believe  in the existence  of the thing before  it takes place; the 
second  is to believe  in its existence  at the time of its occurrence;  and third is to 
believe  in its existence  after it has taken place. To recognize  the existence  of 
hunger  after  it is gone  is different  from  recognizing  its existence  before  it is gone.  
Similarly,  there are some of the sciences  of religion  which  mature  by experience  
and their mature  state as compared  with their premature  state is like the esoteric  
as compared  to the exoteric.  Hence  there  is a difference  between  the sick man's  
knowledge  of health  and the healthy  man's  knowledge  of it. In short,  men differ  
in these four parts; yet in none of them is there an esoteric  meaning  which  
contradicts  the exoteric.  Rather  the exoteric  meaning  completes  and perfects  the 
esoteric  just as the pith completes  the husk.
The fifth category  is where  concrete  words  are used figuratively.  The feeble  
minded  will regard  the literal and exoteric  meaning  sensible  and will not go 
beyond  it; but the man  who has an insight  for realities  will comprehend  the secret  
it contains.  This is like the words  of him who said: "The  wall said to the peg, ‘why  
do you split me?' The peg replied,  (‘How  do I know?).  As him who is hitting  me 
and does not let me go. Go see the mallet  which is behind  me' ” This is, 
undoubtedly,  figurative.  Of the same kind are the following  words of Allah,  
"Then  He applied  Himself  to the Heaven,  which  was then but smoke:  and to it 
and to the Earth  He said: 'Come  ye, whether  in obedience  or against  your will?  
And they both said: 'We come  obedient"  (Fussilat  11)200
i
'
q I


Page 203:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds -----------------------------------------
4i{|$J j' Jui ^3 *ujdT ji 3^3^^ J*-* ^
The stupid  one, because  of his lack of understanding,  would  assume  that both  
‘the Heaven  and the earth possess  life, intellect,  and the ability  to understand  
speech.  He would  also assume  that they were addressed  by a speech  of actually  
enunciated  words  which  both could hear and reply to with enunciated  words  
saying,  “We come  obedient. ” But he who has insight  would  realize  that this was a 
figurative  (use of language),  and that Allah only expressed  the idea that the 
Heaven  and earth  are subject  to His will. Of the same  kind, too, are the words  of 
Allah  when  He said: "Neither  is there  aught  which  does not celebrate  His praise. ” 
(Al-Isra'  44)201
4. *^J %ls* erf Oj3 ^
The stupid  one, because  of his lack of understanding,  would  assume  that the 
inanimate  things possess  life, intellect,  and the ability to speak and enunciate  
words,  so that they would  have to say, “Praise  be to Allah ” in order that His 
praise  might  be established.  But he who has insight  would  know  that no actual  
utterance  with the tongue  was meant  by that, but merely  that everything,  through  
his own existence,  praises  Allah,  and in its own essence  sanctifies  Him and attests  
to His Oneness.  As has been said: In everything  He has a song Which  declares  
that He is one.' In the same way it is said: "This masterpiece  testifies  that it^ 
maker  possesses  fair ability  and perfect  knowledge. ” This does not mean  that thi 
masterpiece  actually  utters  the words,  “I testify..."  etc. but merely  that, through  
its form  and state,  (it testifies  to the ability  and knowledge  of its maker).  Similarly  
everything  does, in itself, stand in need of a creator  to create  and sustain  it, to 
maintain  its attributes  and to move it to and fro in its different  states. And  
through  its need it testifies  to its Maker  by hallowing  Him. Such a witness  is 
comprehended  by those  who have insight,  not those  who stand still and venture  
not beyond  externals.  For this reason  Allah  said: "But their utterances  of praise  ye 
understand  not.” The feeble  minded  do not understand  this at all, while  Allah's  
nearest  devotees  and the versatile  learned  men do not understand  it perfectly  
because  everything  hallows  Allah and praises Him in many ways and each  
comprehends  according  to his intellect  and insight.  The enumeration  of these  
witnesses  is not becoming  under  the science  of practical  religion.  In this part too 
those who cling to externals  differ from those who have insight,  and in it the 
disagreement  between  the esoteric  and the exoteric  becomes  evident.  In this 
connection  people  are either extremists  or followers  of the middle-road.  As 
extremists,  some  have  gone so far in the (allegorical)  interpretation  of words  that 
they have explained  away all or most of their outward  and literal  meaning.  They  
have taken  the words  of Allah,  “Yet shall their hands  speak  unto us and their feet 
shall bear  witness”  (Ya Sin 65)
4 £f}> (4^3*  4^5  fr.4 1 }
And: “And they shall say to their skin, ‘Why do you witness  against  us?’ They


Page 204:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 202
shall  say, ‘Allah  who  gives  a voice  to all things,  has given  us voice'"(Fussilat  21) 
jk-f jjiiijiii  uIIp pjLfi  fj \jJiij > <0
And the conversation  which  takes place  between  Munkar  and Nakir,  and in 
the balance,  the bridge,  and the judgment  day together  with the debate  
between  the people  of Hell and the people  of Heaven  when  (the former)  said:  
"Pour  upon  us some  water,  or of the refreshments  Allah  has given  you” (Al- 
A'raf  50)
4 ^ f U-* j i5 '^ja ullp i1  ^
And claimed  that all this was figurative.
On the other  hand some  went  to the opposite  extreme  and forbade  any but 
the literal  interpretation.  Among  those  was Ahmad  Ibn Hanbal  who went as 
frx as to forbid  the allegorical  interpretation  of the words  of Allah  “‘Be’ and it 
is." (An-Nahl40)
(His followers)  have claimed  that these words  were words  of actual  speech  
with enunciated  letters  and sounds  brought  into existence  by Allah  every  moment  
He created  a created  thing. I have even heard one of his followers  say that 
(Ahmad  Ibn Hanbal)  forbade  the allegorical  interpretation  of all but three  
traditions,  namely  the words of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon him" when  he said: "The Black  Stone  (al-Hajar  Al-Aswad)  is the 
right  hand  of Allah  in the earth; ” and, “The heart  of the believer  lies between  two 
of the fingers  of the Merciful  (Allah); ” and “Verily  I shall find the soul of the 
Merciful  (Allah coming)  from the direction  of Al-Yaman. ” (Even here) the 
literalists  have been  inclined  to forbid  any allegorical  interpretation.  It is assumed,  
however,  that Ahmad  Ibn Hanbal  knew that ascending  (I?’) is not fixity of 
location,  and descending  is not change  of location;  nevertheless  he forbade  
allegorical  interpretation  for the good  and welfare  of people,  since  whenever  it is 
allowed  matters  become  worse  and go out of control,  overstepping  the limits  of 
moderation.  Things  which go beyond  the limits of moderation  are beyond  
control.  Therefore  there is no harm done by such a prohibition  which  is also 
attested  by the lives of the Fathers  who used to say, (when  discussing  verses  and 
traditions),  “Take them literally  as they have been (revealed  and) handed  down. ” 
Thus Malik,  on being  asked  about  ascending,  went so far as to say, “The fact of 
ascending  is known  but its manner  is not; to believe  in it is an obligation,  to 
inquire  about  its manner  is a heresy. ” Another  group  advocated  the middle  of the 
road position  and permitted  allegorical  interpretation  in everything  which  relates  
to the attributes  of Allah  but have taken  the things  which  pertain  to the hereafter  
in a literal  sense  and forbade  their  allegorical  interpretation.  The advocates  of this 
position  are the Ash ‘arites. The Mu‘tazilites  go further.  They explain  away the 
possibility  of seeing  Allah and His being  possessed  of hearing  and sight. They  
also explain  away the ascension  of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  andi
:
l


Page 205:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds 203
peace  be upon  him" and claim  that it had not taken  place  bodily,  the punishment  
of the grave, the balance,  the bridge,  and other eschatological  representadons.  
Nevertheless  they confess  the resurrection  of the body, Paradise  with its food,  
perfume,  and sex as well as other sensual  pleasures,  and Hell with burning  first 
which  scorch  the skin and melt the fat.
The philosophers  go still further. They interpret  all eschatological  
representations  as allegories  denoting  mental  and spiritual  pain, and mental  and 
spiritual  delight.  They deny the resurrection  of the body but believe  in the 
immortality  of the soul and that it will be punished  or made happy by 
punishment  and delight  of non-sensual  nature.  They  are extremists.
The true middle-road  between  this complete  allegorization  and the rigidity  of 
the Hanbalites  is subtle  and obscure.  It is found  only by those  who enjoy  divine  
guidance  and comprehend  things  by the aid of divine  light, not by hearsay.  Then  
when  the mysteries  of things  are revealed  to them,  so that they see them as they  
are, they go back to (the Qur'an)  and traditions  and their wording;  whatever  
agrees  with what they see with the light of certainty  they affirm,  and whatever  
disagrees  with it they interpret  allegorically.
But he who bases  his knowledge  of these things  on mere hearsay  will thereby  
fail to secure  a firm foothold  or gain a well-defined  position  therein.
Such a man who confines  himself  to mere hearsay  would  do better  to follow  
the position  of Ahmad  Ibn Hanbal.
But a closer  examination  and definition  of the middle-road  position  in these  
things  belongs  to the vast subject  of revelation  which  we must  leave  aside.
Our aim was only to make clear that the esoteric  and exoteric  may be in 
harmony  with one another  and that no disagreement  exists  between  them.  At 
any rate many things  have been unfolded  through  (our discussion)  of these  
five parts. It is our opinion  that for the common  people  the explanation  of 
the creed  which  we have already  given  is sufficient  for them and that nothing  
further  will be required  of them in the first degree  (where  they stand).  But if 
any fear of disturbances  arises on account  of the spread  of heresies,  then, in 
the second  degree,  recourse  may be had to a (statement  of the) creed  wherein  
a brief and abridged  outline  of the obvious  proofs  is presented.  We shall,  
therefore,  present  these obvious  proofs in this book and shall confine  
ourselves  therein  to what we have issued  to the people  of Jerusalem,  entided  
Al-Risalah  Al-Qudusiyyah  Fi Qawa'id  Al-'Aqa'id  (The Jerusalem  Epistie  on 
the Foundations  of the Articles  of Faith)  and contained  in the third  chapter  of 
this book.
CHAPTER  THREE:  ON THE OBVIOUS  PROOFS  
OF THE CREED  WRITTEN  IN JERUSALEM
We say: In the name  of Allah,  Most  Gracious,  Most  Merciful.  Praise  be to 
Allah who distinguished  the community  of the faithful  with the lights of 
certainty  and favoured  the people  of truth by guiding  them to the forts of 
faith;  who saved  them from the errors  of the unrighteous  and the wickedness


Page 206:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
of the unbelievers,  and with His grace  led them to follow  the example  of the 
chief Apostle;  who directed  their footsteps  in the way of the honoured  
Companions  of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" and enabled  them to emulate  the righteous  Fathers,  so that they  
protected  themselves  against  the dictates  of (sheer)  reason  with the strong  
cord (of Allah),  and against  the lives and beliefs  of the ancients  with the clear  
beaten  track (of the Fathers),  combining  thereby  the products  of reason  and 
the ordinances  of the traditional  Law. Furthermore  they found  out that mere  
verbal  repetition  of the words  “There  is no god but Allah,  Muhammad  the 
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" ” is of no avail  
unless  they completely  understand  what fundamental  principles  the words  of 
the witness  involve.  They  also have known  that the two words  of the witness,  
despite  their brevity,  contain  an affirmation  of the existence  of Allah  Himself,  
His attributes,  and His works,  as well as an affirmation  of the truthfulness  of 
the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him".  They  have  
also known  that faith is founded  upon four pillars  each of which  involves  ten 
principles  (signal).
The first pillar  is the knowledge  of the essence  of Allah and involves  ten 
principles.  They  are the knowledge  that Allah exists and that He is ancient  and 
subsisting;  that He is neither  substance  nor body nor accident;  that He is not 
limited  by direction  nor fixed  in location;  that He is seen and that He is one.
The second  pillar deals with the attributes  of Allah and comprises  ten 
principles.  They  are the knowledge  that He is living,  knowing,  powerful,  willing,  
possessed  of hearing,  seeing,  and speaking;  that He is removed  from being a 
substratum  for originated  properties  or a locus of phenomena;  and that His 
words,  knowledge  and will are ancient  and eternal.
The third pillar relates to the acts of Allah Almighty  and involves  ten 
principles.  They are : that men ’s actions  are created  and willed by Allah and 
acquired  by men; that Allah  has been  gracious  to create  and to invent;  that He is 
free to impose  unbearable  obligations  and to punish  the innocent,  while taking  
into consideration  that which  is salutary  is not obligatory  upon  Him; that there  is 
nothing  obligatory  except  by Law; that the sending  of prophets  is possible  and 
the prophecy  of our Prophet  Muhammad  is true, being  confirmed  by miracles.
The fourth  pillar is on the things accepted  on authority  and involves  ten 
principles.  They are the affirmation  of the day of resurrection  and the day of 
judgement,  the inquisition  (of the dead by) Munkar  and Nakir,  the torment  of the 
grave,  the balance,  the bridge,  the creation  of Paradise  and Hell, the nature  of the 
imamate,  that the excellence  of the Companions  is in accordance  with the 
chronological  order,  the qualifications  of the imamate,  and that even  though  piety  
and knowledge  are not possible  to obtain (in the incumbent),  his imamate  is 
considered  legitimate  and binding.204


Page 207:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds
The First Pillar  Is The Knowledge  Of The Essence  Of Allah  And That  
He Is One And It Includes  Ten Principles
The first pillar is the knowledge  of the existence  of Allah  Almighty:  The first 
light which  should  be used for illumination  and the first thing  to be followed  on 
the road of admonition  are the instructions  of the Qur ’an, since  no explanation  is 
better  than that of Allah.  Thus He says: ” Have  We not made  the earth  as a wide  
expanse,  And the mountains  as pegs? And (have We not) created  you in pairs,  
And made  your sleep for rest, And made the night  as a covering,  And made  the 
day as a means  of subsistence?  And (have We not) built over you the seven  
Firmaments,  And placed  (therein)  a Light of Splendour?  And do We not send  
down  from the clouds  water  in abundance,  That  We may produce  therewith  corn  
and vegetables,  And gardens  of luxurious  growth?"  (An-Naba  6:16)
0 IjL— CD ^ 3J1 Cp Gtiy JCL13  0' <1/0^ ^ 3
0 6-U3 &-\y^  0 ill It. uij  0 libL  ji^Ji 111LL3  0 LG Jji
^ ^ l5lG>5  "tL* KZJ'jyrx*  a 11 ^4
And: "Behold!  In the creation  of the heavens  and the earth;  in the alternation  
of the Night  and the Day; in the sailing  of the ships through  the Ocean  for the 
profit  of mankind;  in the rain which  Allah  sends  down  from the skies,  and the life 
which  He gives therewith  to an earth that is dead;  in the beasts  of all kinds that 
He scatters  through  the earth;  in the change  of the winds  and the clouds  which  
they trail like their slaves  between  the sky and the earth, (here)  indeed  are Signs  
for a people  that are wise. ” (Al-Baqarah  164)
L3 J-lIh j l*_> ^ 13 0] ^
Ajli ^ bO-4 if9 ^ 5LlGjT^  4ji\ Jjjl
He also says: "Do you not see how Allah has created  the seven  heavens  one 
over the other?  And made  the moon  a light in their midst,  and made  the sun as a 
(Glorious)  Lamp? And Allah has produced  you from the earth, growing  
(gradually),  And in the End He will return  you into the (earth),  and raise you 
forth (again  at the Resurrection)? ” (Nuh 15:18)
Jx>-3  \jJ>oy£ ^<3^* by ^ ^
i 0 6.I>J Awp 0 OiM'
And: “Do you then see? The (human  Seed)  that you throw  out, Is it you who  
create  it, or are We the Creators?  We have decreed  Death  to be your common  
lot, and We are not to be frustrated.  From  changing  your Forms  and creating  you 
(again)  in (Forms)  that you know  not. And you certainly  know  already  the first 
form of creation:  why then do you not celebrate  His praises?  See you the seed  
that you sow in the ground?  Is it you that cause  it to grow,  or are We the Cause?205


Page 208:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 206
Were  it Our Will, We could  crumble  it to dry powder,  and you would  be left in 
wonderment,  (Saying),  "We are indeed  left with debts (for nothing):  "Indeed  are 
shut out (of the fruits  of our labour)."  See you the water  which  you drink?  Do 
you bring  it Down  (in rain) from the Cloud,  or do We? Were it Our Will, We 
could  make it salt (and unpalatable):  then why do you not give thanks?  See you 
the Fire which  you kindle?  Is it you who grow  the tree which  feeds  the fire, or do 
We grow  it? We have made  it a memorial  (of Our handiwork),  and an article  of 
comfort  and convenience  for the denizens  of deserts.”  (Al-Waqi'ah  58:73)we
Any one with the least traces of brain in his head will, on considering  the 
significance  of these Holy Verses and examining  the wonders  of Allah ’s 
handiwork,  in Heaven  and on earth  as well as the beauties  of nature  in animal  and 
plant,  realizes  that this wonderful  (universe)  with its consummate  order  requires  a 
creator  to direct  it and a maker  to govern  it and watch  it over. Human  nature,  in 
tact, testifies  that it is subject  to the will of Allah and governed  in accordance  
with His law. For this reason  Allah  Almighty  says: "Is there  any doubt  concerning  
Allah,  the Creator  of the Heavens  and of the Earth? ” (Abraham  11)
T>ii
The Messengers  were,  therefore,  sent in order  to call men to monotheism,  
that they may say, “There  is no god but Allah. ” They were not, however,  
commanded  to say, We have a god and the world  has another, ” because  such  
a thing  is inborn  in their minds  from the time of their birth. For this reason  
Allah Almighty  says: "If indeed  you ask them who has created  the heavens  
and the earth and subjected  the sun and the moon (to His Law), they will 
certainly  reply,  "Allah."  How are they then deluded  away (from  the truth)? ”" 
(Az-Zumar  38)
And: “So set you your face steadily  and truly to the Faith: (establish)  Allah's  
handiwork  according  to the pattern  on which  He has made  mankind:  no change  
(let there be) in the work (wrought)  by Allah: that is the standard  Religion:  but 
most  among  mankind  understand  not." (Ar-Rum  30)
JLiH  ^ *■ jjUll tiAJ’5 JjUIj ^ jjJl 4jj| C-£ja3  ^
Therefore  there is in human  nature  and the testimonies  of the Qur ’an what  
will render the task of citing proofs unnecessary.  Nevertheless,  by way of 
preparation  and following  the example  of the learned  theologians,  we say: One of 
the accepted  axioms  of the mind  is that an originated  phenomenon  can not come  
into existence  without  a cause.  Since the world  is an originated  phenomenon,  it 
can not come  into existence  without  a cause.  That  originated  phenomena  can not 
into existence  without  a cause, is obvious.  For every originated;
come


Page 209:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds  
phenomenon  belongs to a certain definite time the precedence  or the 
subsequence  of which  may be assumed.  Its being definite  in time and distinct  
from what preceded  it and what succeeded  it, will naturally  require  one who  
renders  things  definite  (in time).  As to one saying  that the world  is an originated  
phenomenon,  its proof  is found  in the fact that bodies  are not independent  of 
motion  and rest. Both states are originated  phenomena;  and whatever  is not 
independent  of originated  things  is itself  originated.  The proof  comprises  three  
claims.
The first is that bodies  are not independent  of motion  and rest. This is readily  
understood  and requires  neither  meditation  nor thinking,  for he who conceives  
of a body  in neither  the kinetic  state nor in the static state is both ignorant  and 
foolish.
The second  claim is our saying  that both motion  and rest are originated  
phenomena,  the proof  of which  is found  in the alternation  and in the appearance  
of the one after the other  is gone.  This is true of all bodies,  those  that have been  
seen as well as those  that have not been seen. For there  is not a static object  the 
potential  motion  of which  is not required  by the mind,  and there is no moving  
object  the potential  rest of which is not required  by the mind. The novel is 
originated  because  of its emergence  and the anterior  because  of its extinction  
since  if its eternity  were established  its extinction  would  have become  impossible,  
as we shall show  and prove  in establishing  the subsistence  of the Maker.
The third claim is our statement  that whatever  is not independent  of 
originated  things  is itself  originated.  Its proof  lies in the fact that if it were not so, 
then there would be, before every originated  phenomenon,  other originated  
phenomena  which have no beginning;  and unless  these originated  phenomena  
come  to naught  in their entirety,  the turn for the present  originated  phenomena  
to come  into being  immediately  would  never  arrive.  But it is impossible  for that 
which  has no end to come to naught.  Furthermore  if the celestial  spheres  have  
revolutions,  the numbers  of which  have no end, it is inevitable  that their numbers  
be either  odd or even,  or both odd and even, or neither  odd nor even. But it is 
impossible  that their numbers  be both odd and even at the same time, or neither  
odd nor even for this would  be a combination  of both the negative  and the 
affirmative,  since  in the affirmation  of the one is the negation  of the other,  and in 
the negation  of the one is the affirmation  of the other.
Furthermore  they can not possibly  be even because  the even  number  becomes  
odd with the addition  of one; and how could  that which  has no end be wanting  
one? Nor can they possibly  be odd because  the odd number  becomes  even  with  
the addition  of one; and how could  it be wanting  one when  its number  has no 
end? (Again  they can possibly  be neither  odd nor even for this will mean that 
they have an end). Therefore  the conclusion  is that the world  is not independent  
of originated  phenomena,  and that which is not independent  of originated  
phenomena  is itself  originated.  And when  its being  an originated  phenomena  has 
been  established,  its need for an originator  becomes  axiomatic.
The second  principle  is the knowledge  that Allah Almighty  is eternally207


Page 210:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
ancient:  He has no beginning,  but He is the beginning  of everything  and before  
anything  living  or dead.  The proof  of this is found  in supposing  that if Allah  were  
originated  and not ancient,  He would  have  been  in need of an originator  Himself.  
In turn His originator  would  also need an originator  and so on to infinity.  And  
that which  goes on and on endlessly  will never  reach  an ancient  originator  which  
is the first cause.  This is the required  thing  which  we have called  the Maker  of the 
world  and its Creator  and Fashioner.
The third principle  is the knowledge  that Allah,  besides  being without  
beginning,  is also everlasting  without  end. He is the first and the last, the 
visible  and the invisible,  since that of which the eternity  is established  its 
coming  to an end is impossible.  Its proof  lies in the realization  that if it came  
to naught  it is inevitable  that it should  come to naught  either by itself or 
through  an opposing  annihilating  agency.  And if it were possible  for a thing,  
which  is conceived  of as self-subsisting,  to come  to naught,  it will be possible  
for a thing,  which  is conceived  of as self-annihilating,  to come  into being.  And  
just as the sudden  emergence  of existence  requires  a cause, so does the 
emergence  of extinction  require  a cause.  That it will come  to naught  through  
an opposing  annihilating  agency  is false, because  if that annihilating  agency  
were ancient,  existence  side by side with it would  be inconceivable.  But we 
have learnt in the two previous  principles  of the existence  and eternity  of 
Allah.  How then did He exist in eternity  with His opposite?  If, however,  the 
opposing  annihilating  agency  were an originated  phenomenon,  its existence  
from eternity  would  be impossible  because  for the originated  phenomenon  to 
oppose  the ancient  and destroy  its existence  is less likely  than the ancient  to 
oppose  the originated  and prevent  its existence.  In fact prevention  is easier  
than destruction  while  the ancient  is stronger  and more  pre-eminent  than the 
originated.
The fourth  principle  is that Allah is not a substance  which  can be isolated.  
Rather  He transcends  everything  which  resembles  isolation.  The proof  of this lies 
in the fact that every  substance  which  is definite  is limited  by its own place  and is 
inevitably  either quiescent  in it or moving  away from it. Therefore  it is not 
independent  of motion  or quiescence.  But both these are originated,  and that 
which  is not independent  of originated  phenomena  is itself  originated.
If an ancient definite substance  were conceivable  the eternity  of the 
substances  of the world  would  have been reasonable.  And if a person  should  use 
the term substance  (for Allah) and not mean thereby  a definite  substance,  he 
would  be mistaken  as far as the use of the term is concerned,  not as far as the 
meaning  for which  he had used  it.
The fifth principle  is that Allah is not a body composed  of different  
substances,  since the body is that which  is composed  of substances.  When  His 
being  a substance  limited  by place is refuted,  His being  a body is also refuted,  
because  every  body  is limited  by place  and is composed  of substances.
But it is impossible  for the substance  to be free from division,  
composition,  motion,  quiescence,  form, and quantity,  all of which are208


Page 211:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds  
characteristic  of originated  phenomena.  And if it were possible  to believe  that 
the Maker  of the world  is a body,  it would  also be possible  to believe  in the 
Divinity  of the sun and the moon as well as other heavenly  bodies.  If, 
therefore,  one should  dare and call Allah a body but not mean thereby  a 
composition  of substances,  he would be wrong as far as the name is 
concerned,  but not in negating  the idea of body.
The sixth  principle  is the knowledge  that Allah  is not an accident  subsisting  
in a body  or existing  in a substratum;  because  an accident  is that which  exists  in a 
body. But every body is inevitably  originated  and as such its originator  exists  
before  it. How  then could  (Allah)  exist  in a body  when  He has existent  in eternity  
alone,  with no other besides  Himself,  and then originated  the bodies  and the 
accidents  after Himself.  (Again  how could He exist in a body) when He is a 
knowing,  and able, and willing  Creator  as shall be discussed  later. It is impossible  
for these  attributes  to exist  in accidents.
On the contrary  they are impossible  except  in a self-existing  and self-sufficient  
being. The conclusion  derived  from these principles  is that (Allah)  is a self-  
existing  being,  neither  substance,  nor body,  nor accident;  that the whole  world  is 
made of substances,  accidents,  and bodies,  and consequendy  He resembles  
nothing  and nothing  resembles  Him. He is the living,  the subsisting,  there  is none  
like unto Him. For how could the created  resemble  its creator,  the ordained  he 
who ordained  it, and the fashioned,  he who fashioned  it. All bodies  and accidents  
were created  and made  by Him;  hence  it is impossible  that they be like unto Hin 
or (in any way) resemble  Him.
The seventh  principle  is the knowledge  that Allah  is removed  from being  
limited  by any direction  because  a direction  is either  above  or below,  right or 
left, before  or behind.  All these He had created  and originated  through  the 
creation  of man whom  he made with two extremities,  the one rests on the 
earth and comprises  his feet, while the opposite  extremity  is his head.  
Consequently  the term above  was originated  to indicate  the direction  of the 
head and the term below,  the direction  of the feet. This is true even of the ant 
which  creeps  on the ceiling  with the result  that the directions,  in relation  to it, 
are reversed-what  we consider  above  is to it below,  and what we consider  
below  is to it above.  Similarly  man was created  with two hands,  the one 
usually  stronger  than the other. The term right was therefore  originated  to 
indicate  the direction  of the stronger  hand and the term left to indicate  the 
opposite  direction.  Consequently  the right  hand side is called  the right  and the 
opposite  direction  thereof  is called the left. Man was also created  with two 
(other)  directions  from one of which  he sees and toward  which  he moves.  
Consequently  the term before was originated  to designate  the direction  
toward  which  he moves,  while the term behind  was originated  to designate  
the opposition.
Therefore  the directions  are originated  through  the creation  of man; and had 
he not been created  along these lines, but rather  created  round like a sphere,  
these directions  would  never have existed.  How then could Allah have been209


Page 212:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
limited  by any direction  in eternity  when  every  direction  is originated.
Or how could  He have become  limited  by any direction  when  He never  had 
any direction  above  Him  when  He created  man;  for that will mean  that He has a 
head, since above designates  the direction  above the head. But Allah is too 
exalted  (above  His creatures)  to have a head (like their heads).  Again  how could  
He have  become  limited  by any direction  when  He never  had any direction  below  
Him when he created  man; for that will mean that He has feet, since below  
designates  the direction  below the feet. But Allah is too exalted  (above  His 
creatures)  to have feet (like their feet). All this is impossible  (to imagine)  in the 
mind.210
For whatever  the mind conceives  is definite  is so far as it is limited  by 
place,  in the same  way as substances  are limited,  or by substances,  in the same  
way as accidents  are. But the impossibility  of His being a substance  or an 
accident  has been established;  consequently  His being limited  by direction  
becomes  impossible.
If therefore  anything  else is meant  by the term direction  other  than these  two 
meanings  then the usage  will be wrong  in terminology  and signification;  because  
if Allah  were above  the world  He would  be opposite  to it, and everything  which  
is opposite  to a body is either  equal to it in size, or smaller  or larger.  All this 
implied  measurement  which  necessarily  requires  an object  or measurement.  But 
Allah  the One Creator  and Ruler  of the world  is too exalted  above  such things.
As to the raising  of hands  heavenward  at the time of petition  it is because  
Heaven  is the direction  of supplication  and implies  a description  of the one to 
whom  the supplications  are offered,  such as majesty  and grandeur,  employing  
thereby  the direction  of height  to represent  the quality  of glory and exaltation.  
For Allah  is above  in all dominion  and power.
The eighth  principle  is that Allah is seated  upon the throne  in the sense  
which  He willed  by that state of equilibrium-a  state  which  is not inconsistent  with  
the quality of grandeur  and to which the symptoms  of origination  and 
annihilation  do not permeate.  It is exactly what has been mean by the 
Comprehension  of the sky in Allah's  Design  in the Qur ’an as shown  from the 
statement  of Allah Almighty:  "Moreover,  He comprehended  in His design  the 
sky, and it had been (as) smoke.”  (Fussilat  11)
This is only through  dominion  and power,  as the poet said: "Bishr  has gained  
dominion  over Iraq, With neither  sword  nor shedding  of blood. ” Thus  were the 
people of truth compelled  to pursue such a figurative  and allegorical  
interpretation  just as these  of the esoteric  knowledge  were compelled  to interpret  
the statement  of Allah  Almighty:  “And He is with you wheresoever  you may be. 
And  Allah  sees well all that you do.” (Al-Hadid  4)i
;
I
1
40if
i •\\


Page 213:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds
This has been taken,  by agreement,  to mean thorough  comprehension  and 
knowledge  just as the words  of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him",  “The heart  of the believer  lies between  two of the fingers  of 
the Merciful  (Allah) ”, have been taken to mean might and power,  while his 
statement  “The Black  Stone  is the Right  Hand  of Allah  on earth ” has been taken  
to mean veneration  and honour,  because  if they were taken literally,  the result  
would  have been impossible.  Similarly  the sitting  of Allah upon the throne,  if it 
were left to mean  fixity  of location  and stability,  would  necessitate  that He who is 
seated  upon  the throne  be a body  in contact  with the throne,  and be either  equal  
to it in size, or larger  or smaller.  But all this is impossible,  and what leads to the 
impossible  is itself  impossible.
The ninth  principle  is that Allah,  although  removed  from form and quantity  
and unlimited  by directions  and climes,  is nevertheless  seen with the eyes in the 
hereafter,  the everlasting  abode.  For He Almighty  says: "On that day shall faces  
beam  with light,  looking  towards  their  Lord."  (Al-Qiyamah  22:23)
4. © J J! © }211
But He cannot  be seen in this world  according  to His statement:  “No vision  
can grasp  Him. But His grasp  is over all vision:  He is above  all comprehension,  
yet is acquainted  with all things ” (Al-An'am  100)
And according  to His statement  in His conversation  with Moses:  "By no 
means  can you see Me (direct);  but look upon the mount;  if it abide  in its place,  
then shall you see Me." (Al-A'raf  143)
i © oji jl>jT  j c) -fjj\ Jli ^
Would  that I knew how the Mu‘tazilites  knew the attributes  of Allah that 
Moses  himself  did not know;  or how Moses  asked to see Allah  Almighty  when  
seeing Him was impossible.  Ignorance  is more likely to be rampant  among  
heretics  and sectarians  than among  the Messengers.
The acceptance  of the Holy  Verse  (which  speaks)  of seeing  (Allah)  literally  (is 
justified)  because  it does not lead to anything  impossible.
For vision  is a kind of revelation  and knowledge,  although  it is more  complete  
and clearer  than knowledge.  And if it is possible  to know  Allah  without  reference  
to distance  or direction  is also possible  to see Him with reference  to distance  or 
direction.  And just as it is possible  for Allah  to see men without  confrontation,  it 
is possible  for men to see Him without  confrontation;  and just as it is possible  to 
know  Him  without  modality  or form,  it is possible  to see Him likewise.
The tenth  principle  is the knowledge  that Allah  is one without  any associate,  
single  without  any like. He is separate  in creating  and innovating;  He is alone  in 
bringing  into existence  and inventing.  There  are none like Him to rival or equal  
Him,  and none  opposite  Him to contest  or contend  with Him.
The proof  of this is found  in the statement  of Allah  Almighty:  " If there  were,


Page 214:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
in the heavens  and the earth, other gods besides  Allah,  there would  have been  
confusion  in both! But glory to Allah, the Lord of the Throne:  (High is He) 
above  what  they attribute  to Him! ” (Ai-Anbiya  22)
4 O ' 03 ^' Cr^-^ 3 ^-cLaJ  -ojT iilf $
This will be readily  illustrated  (by the fact) that had there been two gods and 
the first of them  willed  a certain  thing,  the second,  if he were under  compulsion  
to aid the first, would be a subordinate  and impotent  being rather than an 
almighty  Allah;  and if the second  were  able to contradict  and oppose  the first, he 
would  be a powerful  and dominating  being  while the first would  be weak and 
impotent  rather  than an almighty  Allah.
The Second  Pillar  Concerning  the Attributes  of Allah  Almighty,  and
it includes  Ten Principles
The first principle  is the knowledge  that the Maker  of the world  is almighty  
and that,  in His statement:  “He has power  over all things."
He is truthful,  because  the world  is perfect  in its making  and orderly  in its 
composition.  For he who would  see a garment  of silk, fine in its weave  and 
texture,  symmetrical  in its embroidery  and ornamentation,  and would  imagine  
that it was woven  by a dead  man that has no life, or by a helpless  man that has no 
power,  would  be completely  lacking  in intellect  and utterly  foolish  and ignorant.
The second  principle  is the knowledge  that Allah  is omniscient  knowing  all 
things  and comprehending  all things;  nothing  in Heaven  or on earth is ever hid 
from His knowledge.  He is truthful  when  He says, “And He knows  all things. ” 
(Al-Baqarah  29)212
S<>
Furthermore  evidence  of His truthfulness  is found  in His statement:  
"Should  He not know,  He that created?  And He is the One that understands  the 
finest  mysteries  (and) is well-acquainted  (with  them)."  (Al-Mulk  14)
Cr* ^
He has led you, through  His creation,  to arrive  at the knowledge  that you can 
not doubt the evidence  which this intricate  and orderly  creation,  even in 
insignificant  and meager  things,  offers  to the knowledge  of the Maker  of how to 
bring  order  and how to arrange.  And what  Allah  Himself  says is the last word  in 
guidance  and in revealing  knowledge.
The third  principle  is the knowledge  that Allah is living,  because  he whose  
knowledge  and power are established,  his being possessed  of life will, of 
necessity,  become  established.  If it is possible  to conceive  of the existence  of an 
able, knowing,  doing  and ruling  being  yet lifeless,  it will be possible  to doubt  the 
life of animals,  despite  their movements,  as well as the life of all craftsmen  and 
artisans,  all of which  is utter  ignorance  and error.
The fourth  principle  is the knowledge  that Allah is willing.  He wills all Hisl


Page 215:
213 Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds
works  and nothing  exists which  does not depend  upon,  and proceed  from His 
will. He is the Creator,  the Restorer,  the Doer  of whatsoever  He wills. And how  
could  He not be a Wilier  when,  in everything  which  has proceeded  from  Him,  He 
could  have willed  its opposite;  and wherever  there  is no opposite  He could  have  
caused  the Same  thing  to proceed  from  Himself  before  or after the time in which  
it has proceeded.  His power  is equal to coping  with both opposites  and both  
times  in the same  way. Therefore,  it is necessary  that there  should  be a will which  
directs  His power  to one or the other  possible  thing.  And if knowledge  would,  in 
specifying  the thing  known,  render  the will needless,  so that it could  be said that a 
thing  has come  into being  at a dme when  its existence  had already  been known,  it 
would  be possible  for knowledge  to render  power  needless,  so that it could be 
said that a thing  has come  into being  without  (the instrumentality  of) power,  but 
simply  because  its existence  had already  been  known.
The fifth principle  is the knowledge  that Allah  is hearing  and seeing.  Neither  
the cogitadons  of the innermost  heart  nor the secret  thoughts  and reflections  are 
hid from  His sight;  the sound  of the creeping  of the black  ant upon  the solid rock  
in the darkest  night is not beyond  His hearing.  And how could  He not see and 
hear when  seeing  and hearing  are (attributes  of) perfection  not of defect?  Could  
the created  be more perfect  than the creator,  the thing made more magnificent  
and more  complete  than the maker?  Or how could  they ever be equal,  no matter  
how much  He might  diminish  in perfection  while His creation  and handiwork  
increase  therein?  And again how could the argument  of Abraham  against  his 
father,  who ignorantly  and erroneously  worshipped  idols, be sound?  Abraham  
addressed  his father  saying:  "O my father!  why worship  that which  hears  not, and 
sees not and can profit  you nothing?"  (Maryam  42)
But if these defects  which  characterized  the idols of his father  characterized  
his god as well, his argument  would  have been  invalid  and his evidence  worthless,  
and the statement  of Allah  Almighty  “This is Our argument  which  We furnished  
Abraham  against  His people ” (Al-An'am  83)
Would  have been false. And just at is has been possible  for the mind to 
conceive  of His being  a doer, although  He has none of the physical  senses,  and 
knowing,  although  He has neither  heart  nor brain,  so it is possible  to conceive  of 
Him as seeing,  although  He has no 
ears, for all cases  are the same.
The sixth  principle  is that Allah  speaks  with a speech  which  is a self-existing  
attribute.  It is neither  a sound  nor a letter;  it does not resemble  the speech  of 
other beings,  just as His existence  does not resemble  theirs.  In reality  genuine  
speech  is the speech  of the soul although  sounds  were built  into words  merely  as 
symbols,  just as gestures  and signals  are often  used to represent  the same thing.  
How then has this fact not been known  by a group  of ignorant  people  while iteyeballs,  and hearing,  although  He has no


Page 216:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 214
has been  known  by ignorant  poets.
Said their spokesman:  “Genuine  speech  is that of the heart;  Our words  are its 
outward  expression. ” As to him whose  intellect  does neither  deter nor restrain  
him from  saying  that his tongue  is an originated  thing,  but what  originates  in it by 
means  of his originated  power  is ancient,  (you have no reason  to expect  that he 
will ever be sane again,  and, therefore,  shun  all discussion  with him. Similarly  pay 
no attention  to him who does not understand  that the ancient  is that thing  before  
which  nothing  existed.  (Thus  in the phrase  “Bism  Allah"  (In the Name  of Allah)  
the b precedes  the s and consequendy  the s cannot  be ancient).  For Allah has a 
secret (reason)  for leading  some men astray;  “And whom  Allah causes  to err, 
none  shall guide. ” (An-Nisa  88)
As to him who deems  it improbable  that Moses  could have, in this world,  
heard a speech  which  was neither  sound nor phone,  let him deny that in the 
hereafter  he could  see a being  who has neither  body  nor colour.  But if it has been  
possible  to conceive  of seeing  that which has no colour,  or body, or size or 
quantity,  while until now nothing  else has been seen, the same thing would  be 
possible  in the case of hearing,  just as it has been in the case of seeing.  And if it 
has been possible  to conceive  of Allah as having  one knowledge,  which  is the 
knowledge  of all existent  things,  it would  also be possible  to conceive  of Him as 
having  one attribute,  which  is a speech  comprising  all that He has represented  
with words.  And if it has been possible  to conceive  of the existence  of the Seven  
Heavens,  and Paradise  and Hell, written  all on a small piece of paper and 
preserved  in a minute  part of the heart,  and seen with a part of the eyeball  not 
exceeding  the size of a lentil seed, without  the Heavens  and Earth,  Paradise  and 
Hell actually  existing  in the eyeball,  or the heart,  or the paper,  it would  also be 
possible  to conceive  of the speech  of Allah  as being  read with tongues,  preserved  
in the hearts,  and written  in books,  without  the actual  existence  of that speech  in 
these  things.  For if the very speech  (of Allah)  should  actually  exist on the leaves  
of a book,  Allah  Himself,  through  the writing  of His name  on these  leaves,  would  
exist actually  thereon.  Similarly  the very fire of Hell, through  the writing  of its 
name on the leaves,  would exist actually  thereon  and (the leaves)  would be 
consumed.
The seventh  principle  is that the self-existing  speech  (of Allah),  as well as 
His other  attributes,  is ancient  from eternity;  since it is impossible  that He be a 
substratum  for originated  phenomena  and subject  to change.  On the contrary  His 
attributes  demand  the same external  nature  which  His essence  demands.  Change  
does not overtake  Him and mishaps  do not befall  Him. Nay, He does not cease,  
in His eternal  nature,  to be described  with the commendable  attributes,  and in 
His everlasting  nature,  to be far removed  from change.  For whatever  is a 
substratum  for originated  phenomena  is not free therefrom,  and whatever  is not 
free from originated  phenomena  is itself originated.  The description  of bodies  
with the epithet  of origination  was established  because  of the fact that they are


Page 217:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds  
subject  to change  and variation  in properties.  How, then, could their Creator  
share  with them  (the property  of) accepting  change.
We conclude  from this that the speech  of Allah is ancient  from eternity  
and self-existing.  Only the sounds  which  represent  it are originated.  For just 
as it is possible  to conceive  that a child ’s desire  for learning  and his wish for it 
are existent  in the personality  of the father  before  the child is born-so  that 
when he is born and attains maturity,  having been given by Allah (a 
predilection  for that) knowledge  which  is related  to the father ’s desire,  he 
becomes  bound  by that same desire  which  existed  in the personality  of his 
father  and persisted  until he has acquired  the knowledge  related  to it-it is 
likewise  possible  to conceive  that the divine command,  which the words  
“Take off your shoes ” represent,  has existed  in the personality  of Allah (from  
the beginning),  and that these words  were addressed  to Moses  after he was 
born, having  been given by Allah (the predilection  for) their knowledge  and 
an ability  to hear that ancient  speech  (of Allah).
The eighth  principle  is that His knowledge  is ancient.  He has not ceased  to 
know  Himself  and His attributes,  as well as everything  which  He creates.
Everything  which  He creates  is not novel  to Him, rather  it comes  into being  
with His eternal  knowledge.  Thus  if we were given  foreknowledge  of the coming  
of Zaid at sunrise,  and that foreknowledge  persisted  until the sun had risen,  then  
the coming  of Zaid at sunrise  would have been known  to us through  that 
foreknowledge  without  any necessity  for its renewal.  This is, then, how the 
eternal  nature  of the knowledge  of Allah  should  be understood.
The ninth  principle  is that His will is ancient.  In its eternal  nature  it governs  
the origination  of phenomena  in their appointed  times in accordance  with the 
eternal foreknowledge  (of Allah). For if His will were originated  (and not 
ancient),  it would  have become  a substratum  for originated  phenomena.
Furthermore  if the will of Allah should  happen  in other  than Himself,  He 
would  not be the Wilier  of it, just as you would  not yourself  execute  an action  
which  is not in yourself.  No matter  what hypothesis  you may assume,  its 
presence  requires  another  will, and likewise  the other  will requires  a third,  and 
so on to infinity.  And if it were possible  for a will to come  into being  without  
(another)  will, it would  be possible  for the world  to come  into being  without  a 
will.215
The tenth principle  is that Allah is living possessing  life, powerful  
possessing  might,  willing  possessing  a will, a speaker  with the ability  to speak,  a 
hearer  who can hear, and seeing  possessing  sight. He has the qualities  of these  
ancient  attributes.  To speak  of a knower  but without  knowledge  is like speaking  
of one who is wealthy  but without  wealth,  or of knowledge  without  a knower,  
or a knower  without  something  known.  For knowledge,  the knower,  and that 
which  is known  are inseparable  just as murder,  the murdered,  and the murderer  
are inseparable.  And just as it is impossible  to conceive  of a murderer  without  
murder  and one murdered,  or of one murdered  without  a murderer  and murder,  
it is impossible  to conceive  of a knower  without  knowledge,  and of knowledge


Page 218:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
without  something  known,  and of something  known  without  a knower.  These  
three are inseparable  and the one is inconceivable  without  the other.  Whoever  
would  deem  it possible  that a knower  would  exist independently  of knowledge,  
he would  have to deem  it possible  that a knower  could  exist independendy  of 
that which is known,  and that knowledge  could exist independendy  of a 
knower,  since  there  is no difference  between  these  qualities.
The Third  Pillar  Concerning  The Knowledge  Of The Acts Of Allah  
Almighty,  And  It Includes  Ten Principles
The first principle  is the knowledge  that every  originated  phenomenon  in the world  is 
of His make, creation,  and invention.  There  is no other creator  of it besides  Him, and 
there is no innovator  of it except  Him. He created  men and made them,  and He brought  
into being  their freedom  and actions  (sing. .. All the works  of His servants  are created  (by 
Him) and for Him, and are connected  with His power,  confirming  thereby  His statement:  
"That  is Allah,  your Lord!  There  is no god but He, the Creator  of all things;  then worship  
you Him;  and He has power  to dispose  of all affairs"  (Al-An'am  102)216
4 © <-^4=3  ys*
And <cBut Allah  has created  you and your handiwork!"  (As-Saffat  96)
4 ((Js o>L-*j i-*3 ^3 ^
“And whether  you hide your word or publish  it, He certainly  has (full)  
knowledge,  of the secrets  of (all) hearts.  Should  He not know,  He that created?  
And He is the One that understands  the finest  mysteries  (and) is well-acquainted  
(with  them)."  (Al-Mulk  13:14)
jajj ji li/'?  '3 ^
4 >3 Cr* ^'
He commanded  His servants  to be careful  in their words,  works  and secret  
thoughts  and intentions,  because  He knows  the orientation  of their  works,  having  
arrived  at this knowledge  through  (the act of) creation.  And how could  He not be 
a creator  of the works of man when His power  is complete  and free of any 
impotence.  Furthermore  His power  is connected  with the actions  of the bodies  
of men. These  actions  are similar  to one another  and the connection  of the 
power  of Allah  with them  is essential.  What  then would  prevent  its connection  in 
the case of some  actions  and would  not prevent  it in the case of others,  when  all 
are similar?  For how could the animal  be capable  of invention  by itself?  The  
spider  and the bee as well as the other  animal's  product  fine works  which  amaze  
the minds.  But how could  they have  invented  these  things  alone  without  the Lord  
of Lords,  when  actually  they are not aware  of the benefits  they produce?  Let all 
creatures  be abased,  for Allah,  the Lord of Heaven  and Earth,  is the sole ruler of 
the visible  and the invisible  worlds.
The second  principle  is the fact that Allah,  being  the sole inventor  of the 
actions  of His servants,  does not prevent  them from doing  voluntary  actions  by


Page 219:
217 Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds
way of acquisition,  for Allah  has created  will as well as the willed,  choice  as well  
as the chosen.  Will is a quality  with regards  to man and a creadon  of Allah  rather  
than an acquisition;  whereas  actions  are a creation  of Allah and an acquired  
quality  of man.  They  were  created  voluntary  through  His will which  is one of His 
attributes.  Furthermore  they are related to another  quality which is called  
freedom.  Consequently  in this relation,  they are called  an acquisition.  And how  
could  they be the result  of complete  compulsion  when  the difference  between  the 
voluntary  actions  and the involuntary  reflexes  is instinctively  comprehended  by 
man? Or how could they be a creation  of man when he does not know the 
different  parts of acquired  actions  and their numbers?  Thus when the two 
extreme  positions  are disproved,  (namely  the position  that actions  are the result  
of compulsion  and the position  that they are the result  of volition),  there  remains  
nothing  except  the middle-road  position  which  asserts  that they are voluntary  
through  the will of Allah by invention  and through  the will of the servant  by 
another  connection  which  is expressed  by the term acquisition.  The connection  
between  the will and the willed  need not necessarily  be one of invention  only,  
since the will of Allah in eternity  was connected  with the world although  the 
world  was not yet invented,  and at the time of invention  the connection  is of a 
different  nature.  Hence  it is evident  that the will is not limited  by the necessity  
that the willed  should  obtain.
The third principle  is that the works  of the servant,  although  they are his 
acquisition,  are nevertheless  willed  by Allah.  Neither  a twinkling  of an eye nor a 
stray thought  of a heart ever occur,  either  in the visible  or the invisible  world  
except  through  His decree  and will. He is the source  of good  and evil, benefit  and 
harm,  belief  (Islam)  and disbelief,  knowledge  and ignorance,  success  and failure,  
orthodoxy  and heresy,  obedience  and disobedience,  monotheism  and polytheism.  
There  is none that rescinds  His Commands,  none that supplements  His decrees.  
He leads astray  whom  He wishes  and guides  whom  He wishes.  “He cannot  be 
questioned  for His acts, but they will be questioned  (for theirs). ” (Al-Anbiya  23)
This is attested  in tradition  by the statement  which  has a catholic  consent  of 
all the faithful,  namely,  <fWhat  He wills is and what  He wills not is not” as well as 
the statement  of Allah Almighty  “that, had Allah (so) willed,  He could have  
guided  all mankind  (to the Right) ” (Ar-Ra'd  31)
(J* Iy%X^>  J
{ (J|J ibLitodir  V it oj IpJ jC lj>-
And: “Had we pleased  we had certainly  given  to every  soul its guidance.”  (As-  
Sajdah  13)
d*  >4?-  oS£Sl  J? Vi ¥
i 0 4^


Page 220:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
As to the evidence  for it from  reason  (we know)  that since  Allah  does neither  
like nor will sins and crimes,  they must be in accordance  with the will of the 
enemy,  the devil (Iblis),  who is the enemy  of Allah,  and consequendy  what  takes  
place in accordance  with the will of the enemy  will be greater  than what takes  
place  in accordance  with the will of Allah.  How  on earth  would  a Muslim  deem  it 
possible  that the authority  of the most powerful  Allah, He of the majesty  and 
honour,  be reduced  to a state (so weak)  that if the authority  of a village  chieftain  
were reduced  to it, he would  scorn  and adjure  it, since  if the enemy  of the village  
chieftain  can achieve  in the village  itself  more  than the chieftain  himself,  the latter  
would  abjure  his rank and resign  his office?  But his prevails  among  men, and 
according  to the innovators,  its prevalence  is contrary  to the will of Allah.  This  
would  be the limit in weakness  and impotence.  Allah,  the Lord of Lords  is high  
exalted  above  the blasphemous  words  of the transgressors.
Furthermore  when  it becomes  evident  that the works  of men are, in relation  
to Allah,  created,  it follows  that they are also, in the same  way, willed  by Him. If 
it should  then be asked,  “How  does Allah  forbid  what He has willed  and enjoin  
what He does not will?” we would say that the question  is not that of will.  
Therefore  if a master  strikes  his slave and is reprimanded  by the sultan,  he 
justifies  his action by the rebellion  of the slave against  him. But the sultan  
disbelieves  him. So he attempts  to prove  his contention  by ordering  the slave to 
do something  which the slave would refuse in the presence  of the sultan.  
Therefore  he tells the slave to saddle  a mount.  Now  the master  ordered  the slave  
to do something  the fulfillment  of which  he did not really  desire.  If he had not 
given  his order,  he would  not have been able to justify  himself;  and if had really  
desired  its fulfillment  he would  have desired  destruction  for himself,  which  thing  
is impossible.
The fourth  principle  is the knowledge  that Allah  is generous  in creating  
and inventing  and gracious  in imposing  obligations  upon men. Neither  
creation  nor imposing  obligations  were necessary  for Him although  the 
Mu‘tazilites  hold that these  were necessary  for the welfare  of men. But this 
is impossible  since He is the sole cause,  the only being to enjoin  and to 
forbid.  How  then can He be subject  to any necessity  or exposed  to any need  
or petition.
The obligatory  means  one of two things:  First  an act in the neglect  of which  is 
harm,  either  remote  as is the case when  we say that it is necessary  for men to 
obey  Allah  if they want  to escape  torment  by fire in the hereafter,  or immediate  
as is the case when  we say that it is necessary  for him who is thirsty  to drink  lest 
he dies. Secondly,  it means  anything  the non-existence  of which  would  lead to an 
impossibility.  Thus  it is said that the existence  of that which  is known  is necessary  
since  its non-existence  will lead to an impossibility,  namely  knowledge  becoming  
ignorance.
If the adversary,  by saying  that the act of creation  is necessary  for Allah,  
should  mean  the first signification,  he would  expose  Allah  to harm.  If he should  
the second signification,  he would then be a Muslim,  since when218
>
mean


Page 221:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds  
knowledge  of thing  obtains,  its existence  will be inevitable.  But if he should  mean  
a third signification,  that thing  is unintelligible.  As to his statement  that (creation  
and imposing  obligation  are necessary  for the welfare  of men,  it is worthless  since  
if no harm  would  overtake  Allah  for neglecting  the welfare  of men, the assertion  
that (creation  and imposing  obligation)  are necessary,  as far as Allah  is concerned,  
is meaningless.  Furthermore,  the welfare  of men demands  that Allah should  
create them in Paradise;  to create them in the world of misery  and to expose  
them to sin, lay them open to the dangers  of punishment,  and to the terrors  of 
resurrection  and the day of judgment,  spell no bliss in the opinion  of the 
intelligent.
The fifth principle  is that, contrary  to the position  of the Mu‘tazilites,  Allah  
is free to impose  on men obligations  which  are beyond  their  power  to fulfill,  For 
if this were not contingent,  it would  be impossible  for men to ask Allah  to spare  
them that burden.  But as a matter  of fact they have beseeched  Allah to spare  
them  that burden  when  they said.” “O our Lord!  Lay not on us that for which  we 
have  no power  (to endure). ” (Al-Baqarah  286)
i «©> u ^ ^ u ^3 >
Furthermore  Allah has informed  His prophet  that Abu-Jahl  would not 
believe  Him, nevertheless  Allah commanded  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon him" to command  Abu-Jahl  to believe  in all the 
statements  of Allah.  But among  the statements  of Allah  were those that Abu  
Jahl (Father  of Ignorance)  would  not believe  Him.  How  then would  he believe  
Him by not believing  Him? The existence  of such a thing is absolutely  
impossible.
The sixth  principle  is that, contrary  to the position  which  the Mu‘tazilites  
hold,  Allah  is free to inflict  pain on men and to torment  them,  without  their  
having  previously  committed  any offence,  and without  the necessity  of 
compensating  them  with future  rewards.  For He has freedom  of action  among  
His subjects  and its inconceivable  that His subjects  would oppose  His 
freedom  therein.  Tyranny  is dispensing  with the possessions  of others  without  
their  permission.
But this is impossible  in the case of Allah, because  He does not confront  
possessions  belonging  to others  besides  Flimself  whereby  His dispensing  with  
these  possessions  could  be tyrannous.
The existence  of such a thing proves  its contingency.  Thus the slaughter  of 
animals  is an infliction  of pain on them,  and the various  kinds of torture  which  
man imposes  upon  them  have not been preceded  by any offence.  If it should  be 
said that Allah  will raise them from the dead and will reward  them  according  to 
the amount  of pain which  they suffered,  and that such action  is necessary,  and,  
therefore,  incumbent  upon Allah to perform,  we would  say that anyone  who  
would  claim  that it is incumbent  upon  Allah  to bring  every  ant which  was killed  
under  the feet and every  bug which  was crushed  between  the fingers  back to life, 
so that He might  reward  them for the pains which  they suffered,  would  violate219


Page 222:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
the dictates  of the Law and reason,  since He would  regard  resurrection  and 
reward  necessary  and therefore  incumbent  upon  Allah.  If he means  thereby  that 
Allah  will suffer  some harm through  its neglect,  then it is impossible;  and if he 
something  else, we have already  said that it will be intelligent  whenever  it 
does not conform  to (any of) the (two) meanings  of the term necessary  
mentioned  above.
The seventh  principle  is that Allah  does with His servants  whatever  He wishes  
and does not have to take into consideration  that which  is salutary  for His servants,  
because  of what  we have already  mentioned  regarding  the fact that there  is nothing  
necessary  and, therefore,  incumbent  upon Allah. In fact it is not reasonable  to 
think  of necessity  in connation  with Allah.  “He cannot  be questioned  for His acts,  
but they  will be questioned  (for theirs). ” (AI-Anbiya  23)220
means
I wonder  what  answer  would  the Mu'tazilites  give when,  in connation  with his 
statement  that it is incumbent  upon Allah to do what is salutary  and good,  we 
place  before  Him the following  (hypothetical)  problem:  It is supposed  that in the 
hereafter  an argument  takes place between  two persons,  a child and an adult,  
both of whom  died Muslims.  Now,  according  to the Mu £tazilites,  Allah  exalts  the 
rank of the adult and gives him preference  over the child, because  the former  
toiled and labored  in acts of worship  after he attained  maturity.  In fact this is 
incumbent  upon  Allah  according  to the Mu‘tazilites.  Suppose  then that the child  
says, “O my Lord! Why have you exalted  his rank above mine? ” And Allah  
answers,  ££Because  he has attained  maturity  and has labored  in acts of worship. ” 
Thereupon  the child rejoins,  “But Lord,  it is you who have caused  me to die a 
child.  You should  have prolonged  my life until I attained  maturity;  then I would  
have labored  in Your  worship.  But You, O Lord,  have deviated  from justice  by 
favouring  him with long life. O Lord! Why have You so favoured  him? ” Allah  
would  reply:  ££Because  I knew  that if you had lived to attain  maturity,  you would  
have committed  the sins of polytheism  and disobedience.  Hence  it was salutary  
for you to die a child. ” Such will the apology  of the Mu £tazilite  be for Allah.  But 
then the unbelievers  will cry up from the midst of Hell-fire  saying:  “O Lord!  
Have you not known  that if we had lived to attain maturity  we should  have  
committed  the sin of polytheism?  Why then have you not caused  us to die in 
childhood  before  we could  sin? We should  have been  content  to enjoy  in Heaven  
a lesser  rank than that of the Muslim  child. ” What  kind of answer  could  be given  
for this? In the face of this situation,  is it not imperative  to conclude  that divine  
matters,  in view of their majesty,  transcend  the evaluation  and judgment  of the 
followers  of the Mu £tazilite  school  ? If it should  be said that since Allah can 
consider  that which  is salutary  for men but instead  he inflicts  upon them all 
manner  of torment,  His action is undesirable  and unworthy  of wisdom,  we 
should then say that the undesirable  is that which does not promote  the 
satisfaction  of one ’s desire.  But a thing may be undesirable  to one person  and 
desirable  to the other  if it disagrees  with the desire  of the one and promotes  that


Page 223:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds  
of the other.  Thus  a family  would  deem  the murder  of their  child undesirable  but 
their enemies  would  welcome  it. Hence  if that which does not promote  the 
satisfaction  of the desire  of Allah  is what  is meant  by the word  undesirable,  then  
it is impossible,  because  Allah has no desire  and, therefore,  it is impossible  to 
conceive  of anything  undesirable  proceeding  from Him,  just as it is impossible  to 
conceive  of Allah being  tyrannous,  because  it is impossible  to conceive  of Him  
acdng freely with the possessions  of others, (since He does not confront  
possessions  belonging  to others  besides  Himself).  But if that which does not 
promote  the desire of some other than Allah is what is meant  by the word  
undesirable,  then why did you say that it was impossible  for Him?  Is it not merely  
wishful  thinking,  disproved  by what  we have postulated  in the debate  of the adult  
and the child and the plea of the unbelievers  from the midst of Hell-fire?  
Furthermore  the wise is he who knows  the realities  of things  and capable  of 
harnessing  them  in accordance  with his will. It is here where  the consideration  of 
that which  is salutary  is imperative.  And as to the wise among  us, he takes into 
consideration  that which  is salutary  as far as he himself  is concerned,  in order  to 
gain there with praise  in this world  and reward  in the hereafter,  or to prevent  
some  evil from  befalling  him-all  of which  are impossible  in the case of Allah.
The eighth  principle  is that the knowledge  of Allah  and obedience  to Him  
are obligatory  upon men, not, as the Mu’tazilites  say, on account  of reason,  but 
on account  of the ordinance  of Allah and His Law. For if reason renders  
obedience  obligatory,  it does so either  for nor purpose,  which  thing  is impossible,  
or for some purpose  or desire.  This must refer either  to Allah,  which  thing is 
impossible  since  Allah  is free of all desires  and wants  (in fact belief  and unbelief,  
obedience  and disobedience,  are, the same  in relation  to Allah),  or to the desire  of 
the creature,  which  is also impossible,  since  the creature  has no desire  at the time,  
but rather  he is worried  by reason  and is deterred  from his desires  because  of it; 
and he has no desire except  reward  or punishment  in the hereafter.  But how  
could  it be known  that Allah rewards  man for obedience  and disobedience  and 
does not punish  him for them when both, in relation  to Him, are the same.  
Furthermore  He has no inclination  to the one or to the other and is not 
characterized  by the one or the other. The knowledge  of how to distinguish  
between  them  was arrived  at through  the Law;  while  he who arrives  at it through  
drawing  an analogy  between  the creator  and the creature  errs, as the creature  
distinguishes  between  gratitude  and ingratitude  on the basis of the amount  of joy, 
gladness,  and pleasure  which  he derives  from the one or the other.
If it should  be said that if study and knowledge  are not rendered  obligatory  
except  through  the Law, which  does not become  fixed and defined  unless  the 
person  who is required  to fulfill  its obligations  studies  and examines  it, and if that 
person  should  say to the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" that reason  does not place  upon  him any such obligation,  and, therefore,  he 
is not going  to pursue  the study  of the Law despite  the fact that it becomes  fixed  
and defined  only through  such study,  with the result  that the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" is silenced,  we would  then say that this221


Page 224:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
argument  is the same  as that of the person  who,  on being  warned  by another  that 
there is a wild lion standing  behind  him, and that unless  he runs away the beast  
will devour  him, and that he can ascertain  that the warning  is true if he will only  
look behind,  says to the one who warned  him that the truth of the warning  can 
be established  only if he looks  behind  him, yet he is not going  to do so unless  the 
truth of the warning  is first established.  This will reveal  the foolishness  of the 
man and will accomplish  nothing  besides  exposing  him to the danger  of being  
devoured.  It will not, however,  cause  the Warner  any harm.  The same is true of 
the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" who says,  
“Beware,  for death is lurking  behind  you and further  beyond  wild lions and 
consuming  fire await  you. If we do not take heed for yourselves  and admit  my 
truthfulness  by acknowledging  my miracle,  you will surely  perish.  He who will 
take notice will realize the dangers,  take the necessary  precautions,  and will 
consequently  be saved but he who will not take notice and persists  in his 
stubbornness  will die and perish.  But I shall suffer  no harm  even though  all men  
may perish,  because  my duty is confined  to warning. ,, The Law declared  the 
existence  of the wild lions beyond  death,  while  reason  aids in understanding  the 
words  of the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him"  and in 
realizing  that what he foretells  is possible,  and nature  urges that precautions  be 
taken against  injury  and harm. A thing is necessary  because  its neglect  causes  
injury  and harm;  while  is reason  that which  renders  a thing  necessary  because  it 
makes  known  the impending  harm. But reason  in itself does not lead to the 
knowledge  that when a person  follows  his appetite  he will expose  himself  to 
harm  after  death.
This then is the meaning  of the Law and reason  as well as their part in 
determining  that which is necessary.  For had it not been for the fear of 
punishment  for the neglect  of things  enjoined,  necessity  would  not have been  
established,  since the term necessary  would  be meaningless  if no harm in the 
hereafter  were  consequent  upon  its neglect  in this world.
The ninth principle  is that sending  prophets  is not impossible.  This is 
contrary  to the Brahmans  who say there is no use in sending  prophets  since  
reason  renders  it unnecessary.  (This is false) because  reason  does not guide  men  
to works  which  lead to salvation  in the hereafter,  just as it does not guide  them  to 
discover  medicines  which  are useful  in the health.  Therefore  the need of men for 
prophets  in just like their need for physicians.  The integrity  of the physician  is 
known  through  experience  while the truthfulness  of the principle  is known  
through  miracles.
The tenth principle  is that Allah sent Muhammad  as the last of the 
Messengers  so as to abrogate  all previous  Laws before  him; the laws of the Jews  
and the Christians  and the Sabians;  He upheld  him with unmistakable  miracles  
and wonderful  signs such as the splitting  of the moon,  the praise  of the pebbles  
and causing  the mute  animal  to speak,  as well as water  flowing  from between  his 
fingers and the unmistakable  sign of the glorious  Qur'an  with which he 
challenged  the Arabs  For the Ajrabs,  in their struggle  with the Messenger  of Allah222
I!


Page 225:
223 Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him",  did everything  to check  mate him but 
despite  their distinguished  ability  and excellence  in eloquence  and rhetoric,  they  
were not able to oppose  him with anything  like the Qur ’an, because  it was not 
within the power of human beings, (in their writings),  to combine  the 
succinctness  of the phrases  of the Qur ’an and the smoothness  of its style  
(notwithstanding  the richness  of the Qur ’an in narratives  of early history  and the 
fact that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him"  
himself  was unlettered  (unfamiliar  with books)  with the prediction  of unknown  
future  events  the subsequent  occurrence  of which  established  the truthfulness  of 
the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him". Examples  of 
this are found  in the words  of Allah  when He said: "Ye shall surely  enter the 
sacred  Mosque,  if Allah  will, in full security,  having  your heads  shaved  and your  
hair cut;” and again:  “Alif, Lam,  Mim.  The Greeks  have been defeated  in a land  
hard  by; but after  their  defeat,  they  overthrow  their  foes in a few years.”
The reason  why a miracle  attests the truthfulness  of apostles  is because  
everything  which  human  beings  can not do must  be the work  of Allah.  Whatever  
is linked  by the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him"  
with a challenge  enjoys  the same position  as that to which  Allah says “You are 
right. ” This is like the case of the person  who, standing  before the king  
announces  to the subjects  that he is the king ’s messenger,  and in order  to prove  
that he is right asks the king to stand  upon  his throne  and sit down  three times  
contrary  to his usual practice.  The king obliges  and the subjects  know,  beyond  
the shadow  of doubt,  that the king ’s action  takes the place  of his saying  You are 
right ”
The Fourth  Pillar  Concerning  the Accepted  Things  and Believing  in 
what  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" told Concerning  them,  and it includes  Ten Principles
The first principle  is the belief  in the resurrection  of the dead  and the day of 
judgment  both of which  have been mentioned  in tradition.  They are real and 
belief  in them  is obligatory,  because,  according  to reason,  they are possible.  They  
signify  restoration  to life after  death  which,  like the first act of creation,  is within  
the power  of Allah.  Allah  says: “And he makes  comparisons  for Us, and forgets  
his own (origin  and) Creation:  he says, "Who  can give life to (dry) bones  and 
decomposed  ones (at that)?"  Say, "He will give them  life Who created  them for 
the first time! for He is well-versed  in every  kind of creation!.  (Ya Sin 78.79)
,v Ujfafeif  is jfr I>3 r^'u^cr*  ^ ^  & ^>3  >
Therefore  the ability  of Allah  to restore  the dead to life is deduced  from His
ability  to perform  the first act of creation.
Allah says: “Your creation  and quickening  (hereafter),  are but as those of a
single  individual. ” (Luqman  28)


Page 226:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 224
Restoration  to life is nothing  but a second  act of creation,  and is possible  like 
the first act of creation.
The second  principle  is the belief  in the inquisition  of Munkar  and Nakir.  
This is mentioned  in tradition,  and should  be accepted,  because  it is possible,  
since  it does not require  anything  except  the restoration  to life of that part (of the 
body)  with which  dialogues  are understood.  This is possible  in itself  and neither  
the apparent  stillness  of the dead man ’s corpse nor our failure to hear the 
questions  put to him will refute  it. For the sleeping  person  is outwardly  still and 
motionless,  but he perceives  inwardly  pains  and pleasures  the effects  of which  he 
feels once he is awake.  Furthermore  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" used to hear the voice  of Gabriel  and to see him while  those  
who  were  around  neither  heard  nor saw him. For “naught  of His knowledge  shall  
they encompass,  barring  what  He wills. ” (Al-Baqarah  255)
Thus  if Allah  Almighty  does not create  for men hearing  and seeing,  they will 
not know  Him.
The third principle  is the belief  in the punishment  of the grave which  is 
mentioned  in tradition.  Allah  Almighty  says: " In front of the Fire will they be 
brought,  morning  and evening:  and (the Sentence  will be) on the Day that 
Judgment  will be established:  "Cast  you the People  of Pharaoh  into the severest  
Penalty!" ” (Ghafir  46)^ jyplib  i aS'LsJi ^ysu fy3 lij^c-3 Jilli &
It was also well known  that the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon  him" and the righteous  Fathers  were  wont  to seek refuge  in Allah  from  
the punishment  of the Grave.  This punishment  of the grave  is possible  and the 
fact that the corpse  may be dismembered  and scattered  in the bellies  of lions and 
the gizzards  of fowls does not prevent  the belief in it, because  the bodily  
members  which  feel the pains of punishment  are those particular  members  to 
which  Allah  ordains  the restoration  of sense  perception  and feeling.
The fourth  principle  is the belief  in the balance  which  is real. Allah  
Almighty  says: "Just balances  will we set up for the day of Judgement ” (Al- 
Anbiya  47)
4 ('2*.' Cj.y'yS\ ^
And: “Then those whose  balance  (of good deeds)  is heavy,  they will attain  
salvation:  But those whose  balance  is light, will be those who have lost their  
souls;  in Hell will they abide..."  (Al-Mu'minun  102:103)
4 fHr*“ 4 a.'*1


Page 227:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds
The manner  in which  this is done is that Allah causes  to exist in the balance  
sheets  of men ’s works  a weight  in proportion  to the value  of these  works  in His 
sight. Consequendy  the value of the works  of men becomes  known  to them so 
that the justice  of Allah  in punishment,  His grace  in forgiveness,  and generosity  
in reward  might  become  evident.
The fifth principle  is the belief  in the bridge,  which  is stretched  over Hell; it 
is finer than a hair and sharper  than the edge of the sword.  Allah  said: "And  guide  
them to the road for Hell, and set them forth:  they shall be questioned. ” This is 
also possible  and belief  in it is obligatory.  For Allah  who is able to make  the birds  
fly in the air is also able to make  man walk  over the bridge.
The sixth principle  is the belief  that Paradise  and Hell are created.  Allah  
Almighty  says: "Be quick  in the race for forgiveness  from your Lord,  and for a 
Garden  whose  width is that (of the whole)  of the heavens  and of the earth,  
prepared  for the righteous."  (A1 Imran  133)
4. Sgjs C-'lp  I ^3 Cj* Jj ^225
The word of Allah ‘prepared ’ proves  that both Paradise  and Hell are created.  
Therefore  the literal  meaning  of the verse should  be accepted,  especially  since it is 
not impossible.  Nor will it be said that there  is no use in their creation  before  the 
day of judgment  because  “He (Allah)  cannot  be questioned  for His acts, but they  
will be questioned  (for theirs). ” (Al-Anbiya  23)
The seventh  principle  is that the rightful  imams  after  the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" are Abu-Bakr,  then ‘Umar, then  
Uthman,  and then ‘Ali. No clear designation  of an imam  was ever made  by the 
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him".  For had there  been  
any such designation  it would  have had a much  better  chance  to become  known  
and survive  than the designation  of a local imam  in some part of the land by 
unknown  governors  and army commanders.  In the latter case the designation  
became  known  and survived.  How  then did it not become  known  and survive  in 
the case of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him"?  If 
it were really  made,  how then did it disappear  and why was it not transmitted  to 
us? Accordingly  Abu Bakr  was not an imam  except  through  election  and through  
the oath of allegiance  To hold that someone  other  than Abu Bakr  was designated  
would  amount  to the same  thing  as accusing  all the Companions  of contradicting  
the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" and of violating  
the principle  of catholic  consent.  No one dares fabricate  such an accusation  
except  the Rafidites.  The belief  of the established  community  of sunnah  requires  
the vindication  of all the Companions  as well as their praise  just as Allah  and His 
Apostle  have praised  them. As to the struggle  which took place between  
Mu ‘awiyah  and Ali, it was the result  of different  points  of view in independent  
interpretation  rather  than a struggle  wherein  Mu ‘awiyah  disputed  All’s right  to the 
imamate.  ‘Ali deemed  that the surrender  of the assassins  of ‘Uthman,  because  of


Page 228:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
their many relatives  among  the tribes and the fact that these relatives  were  
scattered  all over the army,  would  lead to disturbances  which  would  endanger  the 
safety  of the imamate  in its early days. He, therefore,  saw fit to postpone  their  
surrender.  On the other  hand,  Mu'awiyah  thought  that any delay  in the surrender  
of the assassins  to justice  would,  in view of the enormity  of their crime,  incite  
further  attacks  on the lives of imams  and would  lead to the shedding  of blood.  
One of the celebrated  learned  men said that every  independent  interpreter  of the 
law was right in his own interpretation;  while  others  said that he who is right is 
one. No one of learning  and intelligence,  however,  has charged  ‘Ali with error  (in 
his interpretation).
The eighth  principle  is that the excellence  of the Companions  is in 
accordance  to their chronological  order  in which  they succeeded  the Messenger  
of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him". For real excellence  is that 
which  is excellent  in the sight of Allah and no one will have knowledge  of it 
except  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him".  Several  
verses  in praise  of all the companions  were revealed  and a number  of traditions  
which  recite  their honour  have been handed  down.  Yet the subde  distinction  of 
excellence  and precedence  is not grasped  except  by those  who were  eye-witnesses  
to revelation  and had the opportunity  to observe  it in its setting  and to watch  its 
development.  Had they not understood  that so well they would not have  
arranged  matters  as they did, since  they did not use to abandon  the way of Allah  
because  of threat  of pressure  and nothing  would  turn them  away  from  truth.
The ninth  principle  is that, in addition  to Islam,  the qualifications  of the 
imamate  are five: male sex, being of age , piety, learning,  competence,  and 
membership  in the Quraish  tribe, because  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "The imams  should  be of the Quraish. ” 
When  these qualifications  obtain  in several  candidates,  the imam  will be the one 
who receives  the homage  and allegiance  of the majority  of Muslims,  and he who  
contradicts  the (will of the) majority  is a trespasser  who should  be brought  back  
into line with the majority.
The tenth principle  is that if neither  piety nor knowledge  obtain  in the 
claimant,  yet any attempt  to oust him will result  in perilous  and unbearable  strife,  
we hold that his imamate  should  be considered  legitimate  and binding  because  of 
the grave  dilemma  which  confronts  us. Thus we have either  to replace  him by 
another  and consequently  stir strife,  in which  case the evil that will afflict  the 
Muslims  will surpass  any loss they may incur because  of the claimant ’s lack of 
piety  and knowledge,  qualifications  designed  to promote  the public  welfare;  but 
no one will destroy  the means  of welfare  in order  to promote  and enhance  it, for 
this will be just like the person  who will erect a single house  and demolish  a 
whole  town;  or we have to declare  that there  is no imam  and consequently  there  
is neither  law nor equity  in the land, which  thing  is impossible.  We declare  that 
the authority  of unjust  rulers should  be enforced  in their land because  of the 
urgent  need for authority  therein.  How, then, do we not declare  an imamate  
legitimate  when  the need for it is great and urgent  ? These  then are four pillars226


Page 229:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds 227
which comprise  the forty principles  which pertain  to the foundations  of the 
creeds. He who believes  therein  will be in harmony  with the established  
community  of sunnah  and the enemy  of all heretics.  Might  Allah  guide  us by His 
grace  and drive  us into the right  path of truth.
CHAPTER  FOUR:
ON FAITH  AND ISLAM;  THE POINTS  OF SIMILARITY  AND  DIFFERENCE  
BETWEEN  THEM  AND THE INCREASE  OR DECREASE  OF BELIEF;  AND  
THE FOUNDATIONS  WHICH  THE FOREFATHERS  LAID  DOWN  THEREIN
This  chapter  includes  three  questions:
Question  One
People  differed  concerning  Islam, whether  it was identical  with faith or 
different  therefrom;  and, in the event  it was different,  whether  it was independent  
from faith and could exist without  it, or inseparable  from it and does not exist  
without  it. Some  have said that they are one and the same thing,  others  that they  
are two different  things  wholly  unrelated,  and still others  that although  they are 
two different  things,  they are closely  related  to each other.  Abu Talib Al-Makki  
had something  to say in this connection;  yet what he said was greatly  confused  
and extremely  long. Let us, therefore,  proceed  to declare  the truth without  
bothering  about  what  is useless.
To begin  with,  this discussion  comprises  three  considerations:  first concerning  
the literal meaning  of the two terms Islam and belief; second  the technical  
meaning  of the two terms in the Qur ’an and tradition;  and third the functions  
which  they fulfill in this world and the next. The first is one of language,  the 
second  is one of interpretation,  and the third  is one of jurisprudence  and Law.
The first consideration  concerning  the literal  meaning  of the words.  Belief  
means  literally  acceptance.  Allah said: "But you will not believe  us” which  is the 
same as His saying  that he will not accept  their word.  Islam  on the other  hand  
means  submission,  and surrender  to Allah  through  yielding  and compliance;  and 
henceforth  abjuring  rebellion,  pride, and stubbornness.  Acceptance  lies in the 
heart while the tongue serves as its interpreter.  But submission  is more  
comprehensive  and pervades  the heart, the tongue  and the senses.  For every  
acceptance  with the mind  is a submission  and a disapproval  of pride  and unbelief.  
The same is true of verbal  confession  as well as of obedience  and compliance  
with the senses.  According  to the dictates  of language  Islam  is the more  general  
term, while belief  is the more specific.  Therefore  belief  represents  the noblest  
part of Islam. Consequently  every acceptance  is submission,  but not every  
submission  is acceptance.
The second  consideration  treats  of the technical  meaning  of the two terms  
in the Qur ’an and tradition.  The truth  of the matter  is that the Law i.e. the Qur ’an 
and tradition,  has used the two terms as synonyms  interchangeably,  as different  
terms  of different  meaning,  and as related  terms  the one being  a part of the other.
Their  use synonymously  is shown  in the statement  of Allah  Almighty:  " Then  
we evacuated  those  of the Believers  who were there,  But We found  not there  anyI


Page 230:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
just (Muslim)  persons  except  in one house. ” (Adh-Dhariyat  35:36)
Yet as a matter  of fact there  was only one family.  Allah  Almighty  further  says:  
“Moses  said: "O my people!  If you do (really)  believe  in Allah,  then in Him put 
your trust  if you submit  (your  will to His in Islam)."  (Yunus  84)
^ @1 Oj *'y&y  5c!*3 o! (y^-i ls~y* ^
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" also said:  
"Islam  has been built upon  five pillars. ” At another  time the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" was asked  what  belief  was and he gave  
the same  answer,  namely  the five pillars.
The use of the terms  Islam  and belief  to signify  different  meanings  is shown  in 
the statement  of Allah  Almighty:  " The desert  Arabs  say, "We believe."  Say, "You,  
have  no Faith,  but you (only)  say, *We have submitted  our wills to Allah  (in Islam),  
'for not yet has Faith  entered  your  hearts. ” (Al-Hujurat  14)
4 jl3 (j y ^ (_)->■ I-aJj I IjJ_*3  d-* 11. \^S' 1C-J  li
This means  that they have surrendered  outwardly  only. In this case the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" used belief  for 
acceptance  with the mind only and used Islam for surrender  outwardly  
through  the tongue  and senses.
(Similarly  when  Gabriel  assumed  the aspect  of a stranger)  and interrogated  
the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" concerning  
belief  the latter  replied  saying,  “Belief  is to believe  in Allah,  His angels,  books,  
apostles,  the last day, the resurrection  of the dead, the judgment,  and in the 
decrees  of Allah,  the good and the evil.” Gabriel  then asked  what Islam  was,  
to which  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him"  
replied  by citing  the five pillars.  He thus used Islam  for submission  outwardly  
in word  and deed.
According  to a tradition  related  on the authority  of Sa‘d (Ibn Abu Waqqas)  the 
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" once  gave a certain  
man a gift and to another  he gave nothing.
Whereupon  Sa‘d said: "O Apostle  of Allah,  you have given  this man nothing  
although  he is a believer; ” to which  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" added,  “Or a Muslim  ” Sa‘d repeated  his question  and again  
the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" added,  “Or a 
Muslim. ” Their  use as related  terms,  the one being  a part of the other  is shown  by 
what has been related  concerning  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon him" when he was asked  what works  were best and he replied:  
“Islam ”; and when he was asked which type of Islam was best he answered.  
“Belief  ".This  proves  the use of Islam  and belief  both as different  terms  and as 
related  terms the one being a part of the other, which latter use is the best  
linguistically,  because  belief  is in reality  a work-in  fact the best of works.  Islam  on228


Page 231:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds  
the other  hand  is submission  either  with the mind,  or with the tongue,  or with the 
senses;  but the best is the submission  with the mind.  It is that acceptance  which  
is called  belief.
The use of the terms Islam and faith as two different  words of different  
meanings,  as related  terms,  the one being  a part of the other,  and as synonyms,  
does not overstep  the possibilities  which the language  allows.  Their use as 
different  terms of different  meanings  makes  belief  signify  acceptance  with the 
mind only, which  signification  conforms  to the dictates  of language;  it makes  
Islam signify  submission  outwardly,  which thing is also in harmony  with the 
requirements  of language.  For the submission  in part is also called submission,  
since  the universal  application  of a term is not a necessary  prerequisite  for its use. 
Thus he who touches  another  with but a part of his body is nevertheless  called  
contiguous  despite  the fact that the whole  of his body  is not in contact  with that 
of the other. Hence  the application  of the term Islam to outward  submission,  
although  the inward  submission  is lacking,  is in complete  harmony  with the rules  
of language.  In this sense Allah Almighty  used the following  statement:  The 
desert  Arabs  say, "We believe."  Say, "You,  have no Faith,  but you (only)  say, 'We 
have submitted  our wills to Allah,  'for not yet has Faith  entered  your hearts."  (Al- 
Hujurat  14)229
4 *4 ^3 bliii  ijJy jSCJ) p ^
The same is true of the use of the two words (Islam  and) in the traditio , 
related  by Sa‘d (Ibn Abu Waqqas)  where  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessin  
and peace  be upon  him" added  “Or a Muslim. ” He did that because  he preferrec  
the one to the other. What  is meant  by the use of the two terms as different  
words  of different  meanings  is that the terms  contend  for superiority  and vie with  
each  other  in excellence.
Their use as related  terms, the one being a part of the other, is also in 
harmony  with the rules of language.  It is the use of Islam  for submission  with the 
mind  as well as with word  and deed;  while  using  belief  for a part of Islam,  namely  
acceptance  with the mind.  This is what  we meant  by the use of Islam  and belief  
as related  terms, the one being a part of the other. It satisfies  the rules of 
language  with respect  to both the specific  application  of belief  and the general  
use of Islam,  which  is all inclusive.  (The one is specific  and particular  while  the 
other  is general  and universal).  It was in this sense that the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" used the term belief  when  he replied  to 
the question  put to him as to which  type of Islam  was best, thereby  making  it a 
particular  aspect  of Islam  and a part of it.
The use of the two terms synonymously,  thereby  using  the word Islam for 
both  inward  and outward  submission,  would  make  it all submission;  the same  is 
true of belief  , which  may be used freely  and its particular  meaning  extended,  
thereby  making  it general  and including  under  it outward  (as well as inward)  
submission.  This is quite possible  because  the outward  submission  through  
word  and deed is the fruit and result  of inward  submission.  Thus the name  of a


Page 232:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
certain  tree is freely  used to signify  both the plant  itself  as well as the fruit of 
the plant.  Similarly  the signification  of the term  belief  may be extended  so as to 
become  general,  thereby  making  it synonymous  with the term Islam and in 
exact agreement  with it. It was in this sense that Allah used the following  
statement:  “Then  we evacuated  those  of the Believers  who were there,  But We 
found not there any just (Muslim)  persons  except in one house:. ” (Adh-  
Dhariyat  35:36)230
The third consideration  deals with the legal rules which  govern  the two 
terms.  Islam  and belief  have two functions,  one which  pertains  to the hereafter  
and one which  pertains  to this world.
The function  which  pertains  to the hereafter  is for the purpose  of bringing  
men forth from  Hell fire and preventing  them  from  remaining  there  for ever.
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said:  
"Whoever  has in his heart the weight  of an atom of belief  will be brought  forth  
from Hell fire.” People  disagreed  concerning  this function  and concerning  its 
fulfillment,  and have asked  what  things  comprised  faith. Some  have taught  that it 
is simply  an inward  adherence  and verbal  confession.  Others  add a third element,  
works  according  to the pillars  of Islam.
We shall then draw the veil off and declare  that there  is no disagreement  at all 
that anyone  who combines  in himself  all these three elements  will have his final  
abode  in Paradise.  This is the first degree.
The second  degree  is that where  a person  has the first two elements  and a 
part of the third, namely  inward  adherence  and verbal  confession  together  with  
some works (according  to the pillars of Islam),  but commits  one or several  
(mortal)  sins. According  to the Mu‘tazilites,  the person  (by committing  such  
mortal sins) departs  from the true belief but does not thereby  become  an 
unbeliever.  He simply  becomes  a reprobate.  (He is neither  a believer  nor an 
unbeliever)  but occupies  an intermediary  position  between  the two, and will 
remain  eternally  in Hell fire. This,  however,  is false as we shall show.
The third degree  is where  the person  fulfils the inward  adherence  and 
verbal  confession  but fails to perform  the works  (according  to the pillars  of 
Islam).  Men have disagreed  concerning  it. Abu-Talib  Al-Makki  held that  
works  were a part of belief  and the latter  is incomplete  without  them.  He also 
claimed  that catholic  consent  back his position  and cited in its support  proofs  
and evidence  which  tend to confirm  the contrary,  such as the statement  of 
Allah  Almighty:  “Those  who believe  and do righteous  deeds. ” (At-Talaq  7)
40?
This quotation  would  indicate  that works  are something  over and above  
belief  rather  than a part of it. Otherwise  the reference  to works  would  be a 
repetition,  which  is redundant.
It is strange  that Abu-Talib  Al-Makki  should  claim the support  of catholic


Page 233:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds -----------------------------------------
consent  for this position  of his and yet relate the following  tradition,  “No one 
would  be declared  an unbeliever  unless  he should  deny what he has professed, ” 
and finds fault with the Mu‘tazilites  because  they insist that a person  who  
commits  a mortal  sin will remain  eternally  in Hell fire. Yet he who holds such  
views  holds  the same  views  the Mu‘tazilites  hold, since if he were asked  whether  
or not a person,  who accepted  Islam  with his heart  and testified  with his tongue  
thereto  and then died would be in Paradise,  he would necessarily  say ‘Yes ’, 
thereby  asserting  that belief could exist without  works.  We would then add 
another  question  and ask him whether  or not that person,  if he had lived  until the 
time of prayer had arrived,  but neglected  to perform  his prayer and died  
immediately  after,  or if he had committed  fornication  and died whether  or not he 
would  remain  eternally  in Hell fire? If he should  answer,  ‘Yes', he would  agree  
with the Mu‘tazilites;  but if he should  say, ‘No’, it would  amount  to a declaration  
that works  are neither  a part of belief  itself  nor a prerequisite  for its existence.  
Neither  are the necessary  for gaining  the reward  of Paradise.  But if he should  say 
that what  he meant  was that the person  (would  remain  eternally  in Hell fire) only  
if he had lived a long time without  either  praying  or attempting  any of the works  
prescribed  by the Law,  we would  ask, “Exactly  how long  is that period,  and how  
many say, those good works through  the neglect  of which belief  is rendered  
worthless?  How many of the mortal  sins would,  if committed,  annul belief?”  
Such  a thing  is impossible  to determine  and no one has ever done  so.
The fourth  degree  is represented  in the case of the person  who accept  
(Islam)  inwardly  with his mind but dies before  either  confessing  it verbally  with  
his tongue  or performing  any of the works  which  its pillars  prescribe.  Would  it be 
said that such a person  died a believer?  People  differ  on this question.  Those  who  
insist on verbal  confession  as a prerequisite  of belief  would say that he died  
before  fulfilling  the conditions  of belief.  But this is false because  the Messenger  
of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "Whoever  has in his heart  
the weight  of an atom of belief  will be brought  forth from Hell fire.” This  
person ’s heart  overflows  with belief;  how then would  he remain  eternally  in Hell  
fire? Furthermore  when Gabriel  interrogated  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him" concerning  belief , the only condition  set forth  
was to believe,  (i.e. verbal  confession)  in Allah,  His angels,  His books,  the last 
day, the resurrection  of the dead, the judgment,  and in the decrees  of Allah,  the 
good  and the evil),  as has already  been  mentioned.
The fifth degree  is when  a person  accepts  (Islam)  in his mind  and lives long  
enough  to be able to confess  the two words  of the witness  with his tongue  and to 
know  that they are obligatory  upon him, but for some reason,  he does not so 
confess  them.  It is possible  that his failure  to confess  them  with his tongue  is like 
his failure  to pray. Concerning  such a person  we will say that he is a believer  not 
doomed  to Hell fire eternally.  For belief  is simple  acceptance  and the tongue  is its 
interpreter.  It is certain,  therefore,  that belief  exists  in its entirety  even before  its 
verbal  confession  with the tongue,  so that the tongue  can interpret  it This is the 
most  plausible  position,  since  there  is no choice  but to follow  the exact  meaning231


Page 234:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
of terms  and to satisfy  the dictates  of language.  The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "Whoever  has in his heart  the weight  of an 
atom  of belief  will be brought  forth from  Hell fire”. The heart  does not become  
void of belief  because  of the failure  of the person  to fulfill  the duty of confessing  
that belief  with the tongue,  just as it does not become  void of belief  because  of 
the failure  of the person  to perform  obligatory  works.  Some  men have said that 
to confess  the two words  of the witness  with the tongue  is indispensable  because  
it is not merely  an outward  expression  of the inward  (belief),  but rather the 
sealing  of a contract  and the commencement  of a life of witness  and obligation.  
The first position  is the more  correct.  In this connection  the Murji ’ites have gone  
to the extreme,  declaring  that no one who professed  to be a Muslim  will ever  
enter  Hell fire, and that a believer,  even if he should  sin, is sure of salvation.  We 
shall see to it that their  position  is refuted.
The sixth  degree  is to say with the tongue  that there  is no god but Allah  and 
that Muhammad  is the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him",  but disbelieve  it in his mind.
We have no doubt  that the fate of such a person  in the hereafter  is with the 
unbelievers  and infidels,  and that he will remain  eternally  in Hell fire.
On the other hand we are sure that in this world,  the affairs  of which  are 
entrusted  to imams  and governors,  he will be reckoned  among  the Muslims,  
because  we have no access to his heart and have, therefore,  to give him the 
benefit  of the doubt  and assume  that he adheres  in his mind to what he had 
professed  with his tongue.232
We, however,  have our doubts  concerning  a third matter,  namely  the status  
which  exists  in this world  between  such a person  and his Allah,  in the event  that 
one of his relatives  should  die, and as a result  of his relative ’s death he accepts  
Islam  in his mind as well. Having  thus accepted  Islam in his mind as well, he 
sounds  the learned  men concerning  his status  saying,  “I did not accept  Islam  with  
my mind, (although  I had confessed  it with my tongue),  until my relative  died.  
Having  fallen  heir to his property,  I wish to know  whether  or not it is lawful  for 
me to receive  it ?” Or in case he had married  a Muslim  woman  (while  he yet 
disbelieved  in his mind),  but upon his marriage  he came to accept  Islam  in his 
mind;  would  he be required  to go through  the marriage  contract  again?  These  
questions  are controversial  and leave  room  for different  opinions.  Thus  it may be 
said that the decisions  of this world,  whether  they be manifest  or hidden,  depend  
upon  the express  confession  of Islam.  It may also be said that, in so far as they  
pertain  to the individual  in his relations  to other men, these decisions  depend  
upon  the outward  confession  of Islam,  because  the mind  of the individual  is not 
known  to others  besides  himself  and Allah.  The more  correct  position,  and Allah  
knows  best, is that it is unlawful  for that person  to receive  the inheritance  of his 
deceased  relative,  and that he must go through  the marriage  contract  a second  
time. For this reason,  Hudhaifah  used to stay away from the funerals  of


Page 235:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds  
hypocrites,  and it was customary  for ‘Umar to follow  his example  and absent  
himself  whenever  Hudhaifah  did so. Nevertheless  prayer  over the dead is a 
formal  ceremonial,  although  it is also one of the acts of worship.  To guard  
oneself  against  what is unlawful  is, like prayer,  among  the obligations  of the 
individual  towards  Allah.  This is not contradictory  to our saying  that inheritance  
is the law of Islam.  Islam  is surrender,  in fact complete  surrender  is that which  
includes  both outward  and inward (acts). These are doubtful  problems  in 
jurisprudence,  based  upon  the outward  meaning  of words,  vague  generalities,  and 
mechanic-cal  analogies.  Consequendy  no one immature  in knowledge  should  
think that he could  arrive  at absolute  certainty  in any of these cases,  although  it 
has been customary  to cite them under  those  parts of scholastic  theology  where  
absolute  certainty  is the desired  goal. For no one who follows  the common  
practices  and conventional  formalities  will ever succeed.
If you should  say: “What then are the fallacies  of the Mu‘tazilites  and the 
Murji ’ites, and what  are the proofs  that their position  is false?”  I would  then say 
that their fallacies  arose from (their failure  to understand)  certain  generalities  
mentioned  in the Qur'an.  As to the Murji ’ites, they said that no believer  would  
enter Hell fire, although  he might  commit  every possible  sin. They based  their  
position  on the statement  of Allah Almighty:  " And as for us, since we have  
listened  to the Guidance,  we have accepted  it: and any who believes  in his Lord  
has no fear, either  of a short  (account)  or of any injustice. ” (Al-Jinn  13)
^ (0) 'ji L*J blj ^
And: " And those who believe  in Allah and His Messengers,  they are the 
Sincere  (Lovers  of Truth),  and the Witnesses  (who testify),  in the eyes of their  
Lord: they shall have their Reward  and their Light. But those who reject  Allah  
and deny  Our Signs,  they are the Companions  of Hell-Fire.”  (Al-Hadid  19)233
49  ^14^1
And: " Almost  bursting  with fury: every time a Group  is cast therein,  its 
Keepers  will ask, ’’Did no Warner  come to you?"  They  will say: "Yes indeed;  a 
Warner  did come  to us, but we rejected  him and said, 'Allah  never  sent down  any 
(Message):  you are in nothing  but an egregious  delusion!" 1 (Al-Mulk  8:9)
i ^ Oj cr? ^ ^
His saying:  “every time a Group  is cast therein ” is inclusive  and therefore  
every  one who was cast into Hell fire must have rejected  the warner.  They rely 
also upon the statement  of Allah Almighty  “None shall be cast into it but the 
most  wretched  who has belied  the truth  and turned  their  back."  (Al-layl  15:16)


Page 236:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 234
In this verse  we find a specification,  as well as an affirmation  and a negation.  
They  also point  out the following  statement:  " If any do good,  good  will (accrue)  
to them  therefrom;  and they will be secure  from  terror  that Day.”  (An-Naml  89)
4 © o? (*-*3 ^ * £ cr* ^
But belief  is the beginning  of good works,  as they quote:  "And Allah  loves  
these  who do good. ” (A1 Imran  134)
4 ^'3 ^
Allah also says: “As to those  who believe  and work righteousness,  verily  we 
shall not suffer  to perish  the reward  of any who do a (single)  righteous  deed. ” 
(Al-Kahf  30)
4 (jjj) 1 O'* 5^' ; ^ hi 1- va )T l^b^J If ^ jiUjT Oj ^
But they have no proof  in any of these verses,  because  when belief is 
mentioned  in them it means  belief  coupled  with good works.  We have shown  
that belief  is used to signify  Islam,  which  is in conformity  with the mind,  word,  
and deed. Supporting  this interpretation  are many traditions,  concerning  the 
punishment  of sinners and the extent of their penalty.  Furthermore  the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "Whoever  has 
in his heart the weight  of an atom  of belief  will be brought  from Hell fire.” But,  
how could anyone  be brought  forth from Hell fire if he had not first entered  
therein?  We also find in the Qur'an  the following  statement  of Allah: “Allah  
forgives  not (the sin of) joining  other  gods with Him;  but He forgives  whom  He 
pleases  other  sins than this: one who joins other  gods  with Allah,  has strayed  far, 
far away  (from  the right). ” (An-Nisa  116)
$3 4^cr*3  c-<j. o1 ^ Oj £
JJi3
The fact that Allah may exempt  from punishment  according  to His will,  
signifies  discrimination.  He also says: "And for he who will rebel against  Allah  
and His Apostle  is the fire of Hell.  They  shall remain  therein  always,-forever. ” To 
declare  such a person  an unbeliever  is, nevertheless,  unjust.  Allah also says:  
"Verily  the unjust  are in lasting  torment. ” (Ash-Shura  45)
Toj^l  >
And:  “And if any do evil, their faces  will be thrown  headlong  into the Fire: Do 
you receive  a reward  other  than that which  you have earned  by your  deeds? ” (An-  
Naml  90)


Page 237:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds
All these generalities  contradict  theirs.  Therefore  it is inevitable  to resort  to 
specification  and interpretation  on both sides;  especially  when  traditions  are clear  
in their pronouncements  that the sinners  will be punished.  In fact the statement  
of Allah  Almighty:  “Not one of you but will Pass over  it: this is, with  your  Lord,  a 
decree  which  must  be accomplished ” (Maryam  71)40\ >
Is almost  an express  declaration  that punishment  is inevitable  to all, because  
every believer  cannot  help but commit  an offence.  Furthermore,  by the phrase  
“Who  will enter  the Great  Fire,  in which  he will then neither  die or live."
4 O' ^ ^ p O <j-^  ^
Allah meant  certain  particular  men, since the appellation'  the most  wretched ’ 
refers  to a particular  person.
Again  in His statement  every  time a Group  is cast therein,  its Keepers  will ask, 
"Did no Warner  come  to you?"  They  will say: "Yes indeed;  a Warner  did come  to 
us, but we rejected  him and said, 'Allah  never  sent down  any (Message):  you are 
in nothing  but an egregious  delusion!"'. ” (Al-Mulk  8:9)
4Jil iJjj L UJij jj bpl?- -L3 ijJli JLJl ^
4 *4 Cr?
Allah  meant  a special  group  of unbelievers.
At any rate the particularization  of the general  is not difficult.  Because  of this 
last verse  Al-Ash ‘ari as well as several  other  scholastics  was misled  into denying  
the general  application  (of anything  at all), and said that such terms must await  
the development  of (new) contexts  which will determine  and clarify their  
significations.
The fallacy  of the Mu‘tazilites  arose from failure  to understand  the following  
statement  of Allah. (They have thus failed to grasp the real meaning  of) the 
statement  of Allah  Almighty:  " But, without  doubt,  I am (also) He that forgives  
again  and again,  to those  who repent,  believe,  and do right,  who,  in fine, are ready  
to receive  true guidance.”  (Ta Ha 82)
J/j  cij3 ^
And " By (the Token  of) Time (through  the Ages),  Verily  Man is in loss,  
Except  those  who have Faith,  and do righteous  deeds,  and (join together)  in the 
mutual  teaching  of Truth,  and of Patience  and Constancy."  (Al-Asrl-3)
piJi  i ip;  oyfr  *3j jJ Pp  oj OP'3  >
And also: “Not one of you but will Pass over it: this is, with your Lord, a 
decree  which  must  be accomplished ” (Maryam  71)235


Page 238:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 236
^ o yj o!3 ^
And He adds:  “But we shall save those  Who  guarded  against  evil, and we shall  
leave  the wrongdoers  therein,  (Humbled)  to their  knees. ” (Maryam  72)
1j»> oyfr  ^ P >
Also the statement  of Allah:  " for any that disobey  Allah  and His Messenger-  
for them  is Hell: they shall dwell  therein  forever."  (Al-Jinn  23)
4 © * ^ ^ 3^ Op j3 0^3 ^
They  also failed  to understand  every  verse  wherein  Allah  Almighty  mentions  
good  works  coupled  with belief,  and also such statements  of Allah  as His saying:  
" If a man kills a Believer  intentionally,  his recompense  is Hell, to abide therein  
(forever):  and the wrath and the curse of Allah are upon him, and a dreadful  
penalty  is prepared  for him. ” (An-Nisa  93)
<11p 4jjl 1^3 I jll>- I jJLjcL* 1x^4 ^ 4 iL> qaJ ^
U-hp  IjIJlp ..iJ -lpIj
These  generalities  are also specific  as is proved  by the statement  of Allah  
Almighty:  "But  other  sins He will forgive  to him whom  He will.” (An-Nisa  116)
i {Jjj *fio viAJ’i 3 ^ 4/^  o1 ^ S oj ^
Therefore  freedom  to forgive  men sins, other  than the sin of polytheism,  must  
be left to Allah. Similarly  the statement  of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace be upon him" when  he said: "Whoever  has in his heart the 
weight  of an atom  of belief  will be brought  forth from Hell fire,” prove  the same  
thing.  So also does the statement  of Allah  Almighty:  " As to those  who believe  
and work righteousness,  verily  we shall not suffer  to perish  the reward  of any 
who do a (single)  righteous  deed. ” (Al-Kahf  30)
And "Verily  Allah suffers  not the reward  of the righteous  to perish.”  (At- 
Tawbah  120)
How  then would  Allah  suffer  the reward  of belief  itself  as well as that of good  
works  to be lost because  of one single offence?  As to the statement  of Allah  
Almighty  “If a man kills a Believer  intentionally,  his recompense  is Hell, to abide  
therein  (forever)"  (An-Nisa  93)
^ Cpj ! aU>- J0$\j>x3  Ij-ljCL*  iX-jl ^3 ^
They  mean  whoever  shall kill a believer  because  of his belief,  and the words  
have  been  revealed  for that particular  purpose.


Page 239:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds
You may say: “What has already  been said will lead to the conclusion  that 
belief  obtains  without  good  works  although  it is well known  that the Fathers  said 
that belief comprises  inward  adherence,  verbal confession  and good works;  
explain  to us therefore  the meaning  of all this.”  I shall then say: It is not unlikely  
that good  works  be considered  a part of belief,  because  they perfect  and complete  
it, just as it is said that the head and hands  are part of man. It is evident  that a 
person  will cease to be human  if his head no longer  exists;  but he will not cease  
to be a human  being  if one of his hands  is lost through  amputadon.  Similarly  
both the magnificent  and the praise  (at the beginning  of prayer)  are considered  a 
part of prayer, although  it is not annulled  with their omission.  Therefore  
acceptance  with the mind stands  in relation  to belief  as does the head in relation  
to the existence  of man (in this life), since  the one depends  for its existence  upon  
the other  and ceases  to exist when the other  no longer  is. The remaining  good  
works  are like the limbs  of the body,  some are more  important  than the others.  
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "A 
believer  is no longer  a believer  when he commits  fornication.”  Furthermore  the 
Companions  held the same opinion  as the Mu‘tazilites  concerning  the fact that a 
person  ceases  to be a believer  when  he commits  the sin of fornication.  When  this 
really means  is that such a person  is no longer  a real believer  possessing  a 
complete  and perfect  belief,  just as the deformed  individual  whose  limbs have  
been  amputated  is described  as being  no longer  a human  being;  in other  words  he 
lacks that perfection  which  is beyond  actual  humanity.
Question  Two
You may say, “The Fathers  have agreed  that belief  is subject  to increase  and 
depreciation-increasing  with obedience  and good works,  and decreasing  with  
disobedience  and sin.” In that case I shall say that the Fathers  are just witnesses,  
and no one has any right  to depart  from  their  judgment.
What  they have said is true; but the important  thing  is to grasp  its meaning.  It 
proves  that good  works  are not an integral  part of belief  nor a basic thing  for its 
existence.  Rather  they are a super-addition  which augments  belief. Both the 
surplus  and the deficit  exist,  but nothing  increases  in itself.  Thus  it cannot  be said 
that man ’s head  is an addition  or a surplus  which  increases  his stature  or size; but 
his beard  and corpulence  are. Similarly  it is not permissible  to say that prayer  is 
augmented  and increased  by kneeling  and prostration;  rather  it is augmented  by 
the manner  of its execution  and the usages  followed  therein.  This, therefore,  is a 
clear  declaration  that belief  as such does exist,  and that once  it exists,  it may vary,  
subject  to increase  and depreciation.
If you then say that the ambiguity  lies in the problem  of acceptance;  how  
could  it increase  and diminish  when  it is always  the same?  I shall then say that  
if we put aside  all hypocrisy  and ignore  the opposition  of adversaries  and then  
lift the veil off the exact  meaning  of the word,  all ambiguity  will be removed.  
We consequently  say that belief  is a common  noun used in three different  
ways.237


Page 240:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
The first usage  denotes  an acceptance  with the heart,  a belief  based on the 
authority  of others  without  the benefit  of revelation  and an open heart.  This is 
the belief  of the common  folk; in fact it is the belief  of all people  except  the elite.  
This belief  is, as it were,  a knot  bound  around  the heart,  sometimes  tightened  and 
made stronger  and sometimes  loosened  and made  weaker,  just like the knot of 
any string.
Do not consider  this unlikely  but remember  the tenacity  of Jews in holding  
fast to their doctrine,  how they cannot  be shaken  or moved  from it either  by 
threatening,  or warning,  promising  or admonishing,  examining  or proving.  The 
same  is true of Christians  and heretics  among  whom  exist some  who can be made  
to doubt  with the least  word,  and can be made  to move  from their  belief  with the 
least attraction  or threat,  although,  like the Jews,  they do not doubt  the veracity  
of their own doctrine,  yet they differ  in the degree  of their determination.  Such  
variations  in the degree  of determination  do also exist  in the true belief,  and good  
works influence  the development  and growth  of this determination,  just as 
irrigation  influences  the growth  of trees.
Allah says: “Whenever  there comes down a Surah,  some of them say: 
which  of you has had his Faith increased  by it? yea, those  who believe,  their  
Faith  is increased,  and they do rejoice.  But those  in whose  hearts  is a disease,  
it will add doubt  to their doubt,  and they will die in a state of unbelief. ” (At-  
Tawbah  124:125)
L*li *Colj ^ 5 lijj ^
i (0 f-*3
And: “(He it is who sends  down  tranquillity  into the hearts  of the believers)  
that they might  increase  in faith. ” (Al-Fath  4)
i (0 b■>’?>! 4 aLSwJT Jjj* <j^j*  ^
According  to one tradition  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah ’s blessing  and peace  
be upon him" said: "Belief  is subject  to increase  and depreciation. ” This is 
accomplished  by the influence  of good works  upon the heart, a thing  which  is 
not perceived  except  by him who meditates  over his different  inner  states  during  
the hours  of worship  and applies  himself  solely  to it through  the presence  of the 
heart  at the time of inactivity  and languor,  as well as realizing  the variations  which  
are inherent  in devoting  oneself  in these  states  to the articles  of belief,  so that the 
tie which  binds  him to his belief  might  become  firmer  and consequently  harder  to 
undo for the person  who wishes  to loosen  it with doubt.  In fact if the person,  
who believes  that the orphan  offers  him the opportunity  to reveal  the quality  of 
mercy,  will act according  to his belief  and show  kindness  toward  the orphan,  he 
will be assured  within  himself  of the real existence  of mercy  as well as of its 
manifold  increase  through  its active operation.  Similarly  if the person  who238


Page 241:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds
believes  in modesty  will, in accordance  with his belief,  humble  himself  before  
another  person,  he will sense  the quality  of modesty  within  himself  at the time he 
performs  the act. The same is true of all the qualities  of the heart : all bodily  
actions  proceed  from them, and then the very influence  of these actions  react  
upon them, thereby  confirming  (their  existence)  and increasing  (their strength).  
This subject  will be discussed  in both the Quarter  on the Saving  Matters  of Life 
and the Quarter  on the Destructive  Matters  in Life when  we take up the relation  
of the inward  to the outward  and that of works  to beliefs.  This relation  is of the 
same nature  as that of the relation  between  the visible  world  and the invisible  
world.  By the visible  world  which  is also called  'Alam  Al-Shahadah',  I mean  the 
world  which  is perceived  by the senses;  and by the invisible  world  which  is also 
called  'Alam  Al-Ghaib',  I mean the world  which  is perceived  by the light of the 
mind.  The heart  belongs  to the invisible  world  while  the members  of the body  as 
well as their  activities  belong  to the visible  world.
The subtlety  and fineness  of the interdependence  of the two worlds  have led 
some men to think that they are closely  connected,  while others  thought  that 
there was no world  except  the visible  (lam Al-Shahadah)  which  is made of the 
concrete  and tangible  bodies.  One who has perceived  the two worlds  and realized  
first their independence  and then their interdependence  expressed  his 
observation  in the following  manner:  ‘The  glass  was fine, the wine  was clear,  like 
a single  body  they seemed  to appear.
So confusion  spread:  to some  it seemed  Nothing  but glass;  while  others  swore  
This is but wine, no glass is here ’.” Let us go back to the main purpose  of our 
discussion,  especially  since the invisible  world  is outside  the scope  of the science  
of practical  religion. Nevertheless  the two worlds are connected  and 
interdependent.  For this reason  the science  of revelation  extends  its scope  every  
now and then into the realm  of practical  religion  and does not withdraw  until it 
imposes  some  obligations.  This then is how belief,  in accordance  with this usage,  
increases  through  good  works.  For this reason  ‘All said: "Verily  belief  will loom  
as a single  white  spot in the heart  of man. If the man will do that which  is good,  
the white  spot will grow  and spread  until the whole  heart  is white.  On the other  
hand  hypocrisy  makes  its first appearance  as a black  blotch  in the heart  of man. If 
the man will do that which  is unlawful,  the black blotch  will grow and spread  
until the whole heart is black, and blackness  becomes  man ’s second  nature. ” 
Allah Almighty  says: “By no means!  But on their hearts  is the stain of the (ill) 
which  they do!" (Al-Mutaffifin  14)239
'S’-
The second  usage  of the term belief  denotes  both acceptance  and works,  just 
as the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" stated  when  
he said: "Belief  comprises  over seventy  branches. ” The same  thing  is also seen in


Page 242:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
the words  of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him"  
when  He said: "A believer  is no longer  a believer  when  he commits  fornication. ” 
And when  works  become  an integral  part of belief,  it becomes  evident  that it is 
subject  to increase  and depreciation.  Does this, however,  affect  belief  which  is 
mere  acceptance?  The question  is one of opinion,  and we have already  stated  that 
it does.
The third  usage  of the term belief  denotes  certain  acceptance  resulting  from  
revelation  and an open heart  as well as from seeing  (truth)  with the light of the 
mind.  This last is the least to lend itself  to increase.  I shall,  however,  say that the 
way in which  the mind accepts  certain  things  which  are free of doubt  differs.  
Thus  the way the mind  accepts  the fact that two are greater  than one is unlike  the 
way it accepts  the fact that the world  is created  and originated,  although  there is 
not the slightest  doubt  of the certainty  of either  fact. For the certain  things  differ  
in the degrees  of their clarity  and in the degrees  to which  the mind  accepts  them.  
We touched  on this subject  in the section  on certainty  in the Book  of Knowledge  
under  the characteristics  of the learned  men of the hereafter;  therefore  there  is no 
need  to go over  it again.  In all these  usages  it became  evident  that what  they have  
said concerning  the increase  and depreciation  of belief  was true. How  could  it not 
be true when  we have the express  testimony  of tradition  that “Whoever  has in his 
heart the weight  of an atom of belief  will be brought  forth from Hell fire.” 
According  to another  tradition,  “He will be brought  forth from  Hell fire, who has 
in his heart the weight  of a Dinar  of belief. ” Why then should  the amount  differ  
if the belief  in the heart  does not vary?240
Question  Three
You may ask, “What  then have the Fathers  meant  with the saying,  ‘If it be the 
will of Allah I am a believer? ”* A qualification  implies  doubt,  and to entertain  
doubts  concerning  the veracity  of belief  amounts  to unbelief.  Yet all the Fathers  
used to refrain  from  giving  a definite  reply  concerning  belief,  and were extremely  
careful  not to commit  themselves.  In this connection  Sufyan  Ath-Thawri  said:  
"He who says, ‘I am a believer  in the sight  of Allah*,  is a liar; and he who says, ‘I 
am really  a believer ’, is an innovator. ” But how can he be a liar when  he himself  
knows  that he is a believer?  For he who is a believer  in himself  is a believer  in the 
sight of Allah,  just as he who is big and generous  in himself  and is aware  of this 
fact, will be big and generous  in the sight of Allah.  The same  is true of him who  
is likewise  glad, or sad, or hearing,  or seeing.  On the other hand if man were  
asked  whether  or not he was an animal  it would  not be fitting  for him to reply,  
“If it be the will of Allah,  I am an animal. ” When  Sufyan  made  this statement  he 
was asked, “What  then shall we say?” Thereupon  he replied:  “We believe  in 
Allah,  and that which  has been sent down to us." And what is the difference  
between  sayings,  “We believe  in Allah and that which  has been sent down  to 
us” and saying,  “I am a believer? ” Once  upon  a time Al-Hassan  (Al-Basri)  was 
asked,  “Are you a believer  ?*’ To which  he replied:  “If it be the will of Allah. ” }


Page 243:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds  
Thereupon  he was told, “O Abu Sa‘id ? Why do you qualify  your belief? ” He 
answered  and said: "I fear saying,  ‘Yes ’, and then Allah will say, ‘You have  
lied, Hassan. ’ Then  I shall righdy  merit  His punishment. ” He also used to say, 
“I fear that Allah may find out that I have done something  abominable  to 
Him and will consequently  abhor  me and say, ‘Go away.  I accept  none  of your  
works/  Then I shall be toiling  in vain. ” Ibrahim  Ibn Adham  once said:  
"Whenever  you are asked, ‘Are you a believer? ’ say, ‘There  is no god but 
Allah ’.” At another  time he said: "Say,  ‘I do not doubt  belief;  your question  to 
me is an innovation ’.” ‘Alqamah  was once asked,  “Are you a believer  ? To 
which  he replied:  “I do hope so. If it be the will of Allah. ” (Sufyan)  Ath-  
Thawri  said: "We believe  in Allah  and in His angels,  books,  and apostles.  But 
we do not know  what  we are in the sight  of Allah. ” (You may ask all this and 
say), “What then is the meaning  of all these qualifications? ” The answer  to 
your question  is that these qualifications  are correct  and are put forward  for 
four reasons,  two of which  arise from doubt,  not of the reality  of belief  itself,  
but of its end and perfection;  and two do not arise from  doubt  at all.
The first reason  which  does not arise from any doubt  at all is the care not to 
be decisive  for fear of self-justification  and making  one ’s self out to be pure.  
Allah  Almighty  says: “Assert  not your  own purity. ” (An-Najm  32)241
And: "Have  you not turned  your vision  towards  those who claim sanctity  to 
themselves?”  (An-Nisa  49)
i dp (*4—^' o/ji  jjy p >
And: “Behold  how they invent  a lie against  Allah but that by itself is a 
manifest  sin!" (An-Nisa  50)
4 Cs‘J>S\ \ ^
A certain  wise man was once asked,  “What  is detestable  truth?”  He replied:  
“Man ’s praise  of himself.”  Belief  is one of the highest  forms  of praise  and to be 
definitely  certain of it amounts  to absolute  justification.  The formula  of 
qualification  (i.e. if it be the will of Allah)  is nothing  but an attempt  to temper  and 
tone down  such justification,  just as when  the man is told that he is a physician,  
or a jurisprudent,  or a commentator,  he will say: “If it be the will of Allah, ” not 
because  he doubts  the fact but simply  to avoid  being  boastful.  This formula  is 
that of disavowing  and disclaiming  the fact itself  and means  disclaiming  one of 
the implications  of the fact which is self-justification.  Following  this 
interpretation,  when  the person  is asked  concerning  something  uncomplimentary,  
it will not be fitting  for him to put forth  any such qualification.
The second  reason for the use of these qualifications  is courtesy)  by 
remembering  Allah  at every  time and under  all conditions,  and by submitting  all 
things  unto His Will. Thus Allah  instructed  His Prophet  in courtesy  and said to


Page 244:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
him: “Say not of a thing,  T will surely  do it tomorrow ’ without,  ‘if it be the will of 
Allah'."  (Al-Kahf  23)242
i 1© fg}) lit iU'iOf'^  Jj SCr^  ^3 ^
Nor has Allah limited  (the use of the qualifying  phrase)  to those things  the 
occurrence  of which  is subject  to doubt.  On the contrary  He says: "You shall  
surely  enter  the sacred  mosque,  if it be the will of Allah,  in full security,  having
your  heads  shaved  and your  hair cut: ye shall not fear" (Al-Fath  27)
<• ^ j&jij oj }
4 ©
Although  He had full knowledge  that they were to enter  undoubtedly  therein  
and that He had willed  their  entrance.
What  Allah  had meant  was to instruct  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon him" in the use of the qualifying  formula.  Consequendy  the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" learned  the lesson  
and showed  his courtesy  by the use of that formula  in connection  with everything  
he had said, whether  that thing  was known  with certainty  or doubtful;  so that 
when  he entered  the cemetery,  he said: "Peace  be upon  you, the believing  inmates  
of this abode.  Verily,  if it be the will of Allah,  we shall follow  you."  This he said,  
notwithstanding  the fact that death  is not subject  to any doubt,  because  courtesy  
demands  that Allah  be always  remembered  and that all things  be made  dependent  
upon  Him.
This formula  indicates  such a thing  and has become,  by virtue  of its common  
use, representative  of the expression  of desires  and wishes.  Thus when  you are 
told that such and such a person  is about  to die and should  happen  to say, “If it 
be the will of Allah, ” you betray  your  desire  and not your  doubt.  The same  is true 
when  you are told that a certain  person  will recover  from his sickness  and you 
say, “If it be the will of Allah, ” by way of expressing  your earnest  desire.  The  
phrase  has thus been transferred  from one expressing  doubt to one which  
signifies  desire. In the same way also is its transfer  to express  courtesy  and 
respect  for remembering  Allah  under  all conditions.
The third  reason  for the use of those  qualifications  arises  from doubt  and 
means,  “If it be the will of Allah,  I am truly a believer, ” since Allah spoke  of 
some particular  men as being truly believers.  Consequently  believers  are 
divided  into two groups:  (those  who are described  as truly believers  and those  
who are not). This arises  from doubt  concerning  the perfection  of belief  and 
not its reality.  Every  person  doubts  the perfection  of his belief,  yet this doubt  
does not constitute  unbelief.  Doubting  the perfection  of belief  is right and 
justified  for two reasons:  The first is because  hypocrisy  militates  against  the 
perfection  of belief,  and hypocrisy  is something  hidden  while  freedom  from  it


Page 245:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds
is readily  discerned  or determined.  The second  is because  belief  is perfected  
through  the fulfillment  of good works  which  are not known  to exist in their  
perfect  form.
As to acts, Allah says: " Only those  are Believers  who have believed  in Allah  
and His Messenger,  and have never since doubted,  but have striven  with their  
belongings  and their persons  in the Cause  of Allah:  such are the sincere  ones.. ” 
(Al-Hujurat  15)
^ <4 '3 >j*4^3  lyfiji  (*4 cy-^  ^
The doubt  would,  therefore,  be concerning  this truthfulness.  Similarly  Allah  
says: "But righteousness  is to believe  in Allah,  the last day, the angels,  the Books,  
and the Messengers. ” (Al-Baqarah  177)
i ©  Cr^ 3 V~^'3  ^1 li ^ Cr41 * Cr4-/>** 0^3  £
Thus  Allah  laid down  twenty  qualities,  such as the fulfillment  of promises  and 
fortitude  under  hardships,  as condidons  for belief,  and then said (of those who  
possess  them),  “These  are they  who are true.” (Al-Baqarah  177)
Allah  also said: "Allah  will raise those  of you who believe;  and those  to whom  
knowledge  is given,  to lofty  ranks.”  (Al-Mujadilah  11)
i 0 ^13 ip;  »
He further  says: “And what cause have ye why ye should  not spend in the 
cause  of Allah?  For to Allah belongs  the heritage  of the heavens  and the earth.  
Not equal among  you are those who spent (freely)  and fought,  before the 
Victory,  (with those  who did so later).  Those  are higher  in rank than those  who  
spent (freely)  and fought  afterwards,  but to all has Allah promised  a goodly  
(reward).  And Allah  is well acquainted  with all that ye do." (Al-Hadid  10)
<3^ cr4 ^ *»3 $ ckr* <41^  ^ ^3 ^
4J3T3 4JJI uhj i fj* \yL£U I 4j>-jS I viAyl)j'  Jlfl
He Further  says: "They  are of varying  ranks  in the Sight  of Allah."  (A1 Imran243
iO
163)
The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "Belief  
is like unto a nude who should  be clothed  with piety. ” And again, “Belief


Page 246:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
comprises  over seventy  divisions,  the least of which is to clear the road of 
obstacles."  This shows  the dependence  of the perfection  of belief  on good  works.  
Its dependence  on freedom  from hypocrisy  and concealed  polytheism  is shown  
by the statement  of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" when  he said: "Four  things,  if they obtain  in a person  make him an utter  
hypocrite,  no matter  how much he prays, and fasts, and claims that he is a 
believer;  he who lies when he speaks,  breaks  a promise  when he pledges  his 
word,  betrays  a confidence  when  he is trusted,  and deviates  from  justice  when  he 
enters a controversy, ” According  to another  version  “And when he makes a 
compact  with his neighbour,  he defrauds  him. ” A tradition  related on the 
authority  of Abu Sa‘id Al-Khudri,  says, “The hearts  are of four kinds:  a sealed  
heart,  which  is the heart of the unbeliever;  a double-faced  heart,  which  is the 
heart  of the hypocrite;  a clean  heart  from the midst  of which  a radiant  lamp  sheds  
its radiant  light;  and a heart  which  contains  some  belief  and some  hypocrisy.  The  
belief  it contains  is like unto the vegetable  which  receives  its nourishment  from  
fresh waters.  The hypocrisy  it contains  is like unto an ulcer  which  feeds on pus 
and blood,  whichever  of the two substances  will prevail  will determine  its fate.” 
According  to another  version  “whichever  will prevail  will seal his doom. ” The  
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" also said: "The  
worst hypocrites  of this people  are its Qur ’an readers.”  According  to another  
tradition,  “Polytheism  among  my people  is more subtle  than the creeping  of the 
ant on the rock ” Hudhaifah  said: "At the time of the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon him" there were things  which  made the man who  
repeated  them a hypocrite  as long as he lived.  Now,  however,  I hear these same  
things  repeated  ten times a day, and no one seems  to mind. ” A certain  learned  
man said: "The person  closest to hypocrisy  is he who deems himself  free 
thereof. ” Hudhaifah  also said: "Hypocrites  are more numerous  today  than they  
were at the time of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him". At that time they used to conceal  their hypocrisy;  now they (are not 
ashamed  to) reveal  it.” Such  hypocrisy  militates  against  the reality  of belief  as well  
as against  its perfection.  It is something  concealed  and subtle: the farthest  
removed  from  it are those  who are constantly  afraid  of it, while  those  who deem  
themselves  free of it are they  who are nearest  to it.
Al-Hassan  Al-Basri  was once told, “There  is no more hypocrisy  nowadays. ” 
To which  he replied:  “Brother  ! Were  the hypocrites  to perish  from the land you 
would  feel lonely  on the way.” Again  either  Al-Hassan  himself  or someone  else 
said: "Were  tails to grow (by a miracle)  on the backs  of the hypocrites  and trail 
behind  them,  our feet would  no longer  be able to touch  the earth. ” Once  upon  a 
time Ibn TJmar,  on hearing  a man speak  disparagingly  of Hajj, told him, <fWould  
you speak disparagingly  of him if he were here present?”  The man answered,  
“No.” Thereupon  Ibn TJmar  said: "We used to consider  this hypocritical  at the 
time of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him".  The244


Page 247:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds 245
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: 'He who is 
double-tongued  in this world  will, in the hereafter,  be made double  tongued  by 
Allah'. ” The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" also 
said: "The worst  man is the double-faced  who meets  one people  with one face 
and another  people  with another  face. ” Al-Hassan  Al-Basri  was once  told, “There  
are some  who say-that  they do not fear hypocrisy. ” Thereupon  he answered,  “By 
Allah,  I would  rather  be sure that I am free of hypocrisy  than have all the world ’s 
contents  gold.”  Al-Hassan  also said: "Among  the different  kinds  of hypocrisy  are 
the disagreements  between  the tongue  and the heart,  between  the secret  and the 
public,  and between  the entrance  and the exit.” A certain  person  told Hudhaifah:  
“Verily  I fear I am a hypocrite. ” Hudhaifah  replied:  “Fear not. If you were a 
hypocrite  you would  not have feared  hypocrisy.  Verily  hypocrisy  does not fear 
hypocrisy. ” Ibn Abu Mulaikah  said:" I have known  one hundred  and thirty  (and  
according  to another  version  one hundred  and fifty) of the Companions  of the 
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him",  all of whom  feared  
hypocrisy. ” It is narrated  that the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon him" was once sitdng  with a group of his Companions  who were  
discussing  a certain  man and praising  him to the skies.
Suddenly,  while  they were in the midst  of their discussion,  the man himself  
appeared  before  them  with his face still wet with the water  of abludon,  carrying  
his shoes in his hands and his forehead  covered  with dust from prayer.  
Thereupon  they said to the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon him" “Behold.  This is the man whom we were discussing.”  The 
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him",  turning  to them,  
said: "I see on his face the mark of Satan.”  Then the man arrived  and, after
greedng  the group,  sat in their midst.  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon him" then addressed  him and said: "Tell me, I beseech  you 
by Allah,  have you not said to yourself  when you approached  the group  that 
there  was no one among  them  who was better  than you? ” The man replied.  “ O 
my Allah ! Yes, I have. ” In his prayer  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon  him" said: " O Allah,  I seek refuge  with you from  the evil of 
things  I did and things  I left undone. ” He was then told: “Are you afraid  O 
Aposde  of Allah?”  To which  he replied:  “What could make me feel secure  
when the heart  lie between  two of the fingers  of the Merciful  (Allah),  and He 
does with them  what  He wills?  Allah  Almighty  says: “And there shall appear  to 
them,  from  Allah,  things  they have  never  reckoned  on.” (Az-Zumar  47)
This was interpreted  in commentaries  to mean that men have done things  
which they thought  were good but (on the day of judgment)  these things  
appeared  in the balance  in the scale  of evil.


Page 248:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
As-Sari  As-Saqad  once said: "If a person  enters  a garden  containing  trees of 
ever) 7 kind and on these  are birds  of every  kind,  and then each bird calls to him in 
a different  language  saying,  Teace  be upon  you, O friend  of Allah ’, and as a result  
he feels very well pleased  and satisfied,  he becomes  a captive  in their hands. ” 
These traditions  and narrations  reveal to you the gravity of the matter,  
particularly  because  of the subtle  nature  of hypocrisy  and hidden  polytheism,  and 
bring  out the fact that no one can be safe against  them.  This led Umar  Ibn Al- 
Khattab  to ask Hudhaifah  about himself,  whether  or not he was numbered  
among  the hypocrites.
Abu Sulaiman  Ad-Darani  said: "I heard  a certain  governor  say something  and 
I wanted  to express  my disapproval  of it but feared  lest he order  me to be killed.  
And although  I feared  not death  I was afraid  lest I be tempted  to boast  before  
men when my spirit departs.  For this reason  I refrained  from expressing  my 
disapproval  of the governor ’ words.
This kind of hypocrisy  militates  against  the truth, perfection,  and purity  of 
belief,  rather  than against  its reality.  For hypocrisy  is of two kinds : The one 
results  in parting  with religion,  pursuing  infidels  and joining  the company  of 
those,  who are deemed  eternally  to Hell fire; the second  leads the person  to Hell  
fire for a certain  period  of time and puts him down from the lofty heights  of 
Paradise  and denotes  the saints from their exalted  ranks. It is a field open to 
doubt  and therefore  it is desirable  to resort  to the use of qualifications  therein.  
This kind of hypocrisy  rises from the disparity  and disagreement  between  the 
secret  and the public,  from feeling  secure  from the deep counsel  of Allah and 
from  conceit  and other  things  from  which  only the saints  are free.
The fourth  reason  for the use of these  qualifications  arises  also from  doubt.  It 
is the fear of the end, for no one knows  whether  or not he will still have any 
belief  at the hour of death.  If he should  end with unbelief  all his previous  works  
would come to naught  and fail, because  (the value of these works)  depends  
entirely  upon their good  ending.  Thus if a fasting  person  were asked  early  in the 
day concerning  the validity  of his fast and replied:  "I am surely  fasting, ” but later  
in the day he broke  his fast, it would  become  evident  that he was lying since the 
validity  of his fast depends  upon the maintenance  of the fast until sunset  at the 
end of the day. And just as the day is the set period  for the fulfillment  of fasting,  
so the lifetime  is the set period  for the fulfillment  of the validity  of belief.  To 
describe  it as valid before  its conclusion  simply  because  it has already  been  
fulfilled  in part is very doubtful  and its end is frightful.  It was because  of the end 
that most  of the (Allah-)  fearing  have  wept.  For the end is the outcome  of a pre­
ordained  event  and the result  of the eternal  will which  does not become  known  
except  when  the pre-ordained  event  itself  takes place  and which  no human  being  
can ever tell. The fear of the end is the result  of the fear of that which  was pre­
ordained  and there  may appear  in the present  a thing  which  will give the lie to the246


Page 249:
Book  two: the foundations  of the Creeds
words,  " I am a believer  ”. And who can be sure that he is one of those  for whom  
Allah has pre-ordained  good things?  It is said that the statement  of Allah  
Almighty  “And the stupor  of death  will bring  truth (before  his eyes) ” (Qaf  19)
Means  that the pre-ordained  thing  has been fulfilled  and made  known.
One of the forefathers  said that works  would  be judged  by their ends. Abu  
Ad-Darda ’ used to swear  by Allah saying,  “There  is no one who feels safe in his 
belief  who is not robbed  of it.” It was also said that some  sinful  deeds  were not 
punished  except  by their sad ends. We seek refuge  in Allah against  such deeds  
and such punishments.  It has also been said that such punishments  await  those  
who falsely  claim  sainthood  and the gift of miracles.
One of the Gnostics  said: "If I were given the choice  between  martyrdom  at 
the outer  gate of the house  and death  as a true believer  at the door of an inner  
room,  I would,  choose  the latter  because  I do not know  what  might  occur  to me 
and divert  my heart from true belief  on my way (from  the inner room)  to the 
outer  gate of the house. ” Another  said: "If I had known  a certain  person  to have  
been a true believer  for the last fifty years and then, even though  so frail a thing  
as a pole should  hide him from  my sight  before  his death,  I could  not be sure that 
he died a true believer. ” According  to one condition,  “Whoever  says, ‘I am a 
believer ’, is an infidel;  and whoever  says, ‘I am learned ’, is ignorant.”  In the 
interpretation  of Allah's  statement  “And the words  of your Lord are perfect  in 
truth  and in justice"  (Al-An'am  115)247
4 SgS ^^3 CUajj )>
It is said that ‘perfect  in truth ’ relates  to those  who died in belief  and' perfect  
in justice ’, to those  who died in polytheism.  Allah also said: "And the final issue  
of all things  is unto  Allah. ”
No matter  how little doubt  may be in such cases the resort  to qualification  is 
obligatory,  since belief  is a means  of grace for the hereafter  just as fasting  is a 
means  of grace for absolving  the heart from guilt in this life. Whatever  fast is 
rendered  void before  sunset  is no longer  a fast and will not absolve  from guilt.  
The same thing  is true of belief.  In fact a person  may be asked  about  a previous  
fast concerning  which there is no doubt.  He will be asked,  “Have you fasted  
yesterday? ” and he will reply. “Yes, if it were the will of Allah. ” For genuine  
fasting  is the only acceptable  fasting  and the acceptable  fasting  is unknown  except  
to Allah.  For this reason  it is desirable  to use the qualification,  if it be the will of 
Allah,  in all the works  of righteousness.
This will imply  doubt  as to their acceptance  (by Allah),  since such acceptance,  
despite  the outward  fulfillment  of all the prerequisites  of validity,  may be blocked


Page 250:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
by hidden  cause unknown  except  to Allah, the Lord of Lords of the mighty  
majesty.  Hence  it is desirable  to entertain  some  doubts  concerning  the validity  (of 
belief  as well as all the works  of righteousness).248
These,  therefore,  are the different  reasons  for the desirability  of qualifying  
one’s assertion  of his belief, and with them we conclude  the Book on the 
foundations  of the Articles  of Faith.


Page 251:
Praise  be to Allah  Who has caused  His Kindness  to overspread  His servants  
and bestowed  mercy upon them; who for the purification  of their inward  
thoughts  has made His light and grace to flow into their hearts;  and for the 
washing  of their bodies  has given them water smooth  and soft. And Allah ’s 
blessing  and peace be upon the Messenger  of Allah Muhammad,  who has 
encompassed  the entire world from one end to another  with the light of 
guidance,  as well as upon his noble  and righteous  family,  the peace  and blessing  
of which  will be a salvation  for us on the day of Judgement,  and a protection  for 
us from  every  danger  or affliction.
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said:  
"Religion  has been founded  on mercy."  He further  said: "Purification  is the key 
to prayer."  Allah  Almighty  says: “Therein  are men who aspire  to purity,  and Allah  
loves  the purified."  (At-Tawbah  108)
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said:  
"Purification  is one half  of belief."  Allah  Almighty  also says: "Allah  desires  not to 
lay a burden  upon  you, but He desires  to purify  you." (Al-Ma'idah  6)
4 Q My. Crf My. L* >
Through  these  externals,  those  who possess  insight  become  conscious  of the 
fact that the most  important  thing  is the purification  of the heart,  because,  it is 
very  unlikely  that the words  of the Prophet,  "Purification  is one half  of belief  
meant  that men should  polish  and clean  the body  with a generous  use of water  
and to neglect  the heart  and leave  it stuffed  with impurities  and filth.
Purification  has four stages:  The first stage  is the purification  of the body  from  
excrements,  impurities,  and bodily  cysts,  and discharges ’ The second  stage is the 
purification  of the bodily  senses from crimes  and sins. The third stage is the 
purification  of the heart from blameworthy  traits and reprehensible  vices. The 
fourth  stage is the purification  of the inmost  self from everything  except  Allah  
Almighty.  This last stage  is that of the Messengers  and saints.
In everyone  of these stages  purification  is half the activities  it entails.  For 
the supreme  aim of the activities  of the inmost  self is to have the majesty  and 
greatness  of Allah revealed  unto it. But the knowledge  of Allah will never  
actually  descend  into the inmost  self unless  everything  other than Allah is 
removed  therefrom.  For this reason  Allah  Almighty  says: "Say: "Allah  (sent it 
down)":  then leave them to plunge  in vain discourse  and trifling.""  (Al-An'am
91)
4 {£fj» o rrfy*  J5 ^
249


Page 252:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
It is evident  therefore  that (the knowledge  of Allah and allegiance  to another  
besides  Him) can not inhabit  the same heart  and Allah  has not created  for man  
two hearts  within  him.
As to the activities  of the heart,  their supreme  purpose  is to adorn  it with the 
praiseworthy  traits  and the doctrines  established  by the Law.  No one who has not 
cleansed  his heart from their opposite,  namely  the false doctrines  and the 
reprehensible  vices, has ever been described  by these traits. Hence the 
purification  of the heart comprises  one half of its activities.  This first half is a 
prerequisite  for the second.  It is in this manner  that purification  is one half of 
belief.  Similarly  the purification  of the bodily  senses  from the forbidden  things  is 
one half of the activities  they entail and is the prerequisite  of the second  half.  
Their  purification  is the first half and their adornment  with good works  is the 
second  half. These  then are the different  stages  of belief  and every  stage has its 
own rank. No one will attain the higher  stage unless  he goes first through  the 
lower one. He will not reach the purification  of the inmost  self from the 
blameworthy  qualities  and will not adorn  it with those which  are praiseworthy  
unless  he accomplishes  first the purification  of the heart from the blameworthy  
traits and adorns  it with the praiseworthy.  Similarly  no one will attain the 
purification  of the heart from the blameworthy  traits or adorn it with the 
praiseworthy  unless  he accomplishes  first the purification  of the bodily  senses  
from the forbidden  things  and adorns  them  with good  works.  The more  precious  
and noble the desired  object becomes  the more difficult  is the way of its 
attainment,  the longer  is the road which  leads to it, and the greater  are the 
obstacles  which  block  its path. Do not think,  therefore,  that this can be attained  
through  mere wishing  or achieved  through  no effort.  For he whose  insight  fails 
to distinguish  between  these  different  stages  will not perceive  of them  except  the 
lowest  which  is equivalent  to the last and outermost  husk  of the desired  fruit. He 
will therefore  concentrate  upon  it and will go to the extreme  in the study  of its 
rules, wasting  all his time in abstersion  washing  clothes,  cleaning  his body,  and 
outdoing  himself  in the use of running  water,  thinking,  as a result  of a constant  
fear with which  he is obsessed  and of a hallucination  which  dwells  in his mind,  
that the desired  and noble purity comprises  only such outward  and external  
cleanliness,  and revealing  thereby  a complete  ignorance  of the life of the early  
Muslims:  how they expended  all their energy  and thought  on the purification  of 
the heart and were very lenient  concerning  the body, to the extent  that 'Umar,  
despite  his high station,  has once performed  his ablution  with water  from a jar 
which  belonged  to a Christian  woman.  It was the habit  of the early  Muslims  not 
to wash their hands from the remains  of fat and food but instead  wipe their  
fingers off against  the arches of their feet, regarding  the use of alkali an 
innovation.  They used to pray, kneeling  and prostrating  themselves  directly  on 
the ground,  and walk the streets  barefooted.  Those  who placed  nothing  between  
themselves  and the earth  when  they slept  were  of the greatest  among  them.  They  
confined  themselves  exclusively  to the use of stone  for abstersion.
Abu Hurairah  and others  besides  him of the refugees  of the mosque-vestibule250


Page 253:
Book  three:  the mysteries  of purification  
said: 'We were wont to eat the roasted  meat and, wiping  our fingers  against  the 
pebbles  and rubbing  them with earth,  proceed  to prayer  repeating  Takhir.  Said  
Umar,  'We had no knowledge  of alkali at the time of the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him",  and our towels  were the hollows  of 
our feet: whenever  we ate anything  we wiped  our hands  against  our feet." It is 
said that the first innovations  to appear  after the death  of the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him"  were four,  namely  the use of sieves  (for 
flour),  the use of alkali (for washing),  the use of tables  (for eating),  and eating  to 
satiety.
Thus the only concern  of the early Muslims  was the cleanliness  of the heart.  
One of them even said: "To perform  prayer  with the shoes on is better than  
performing  it without  them because  when the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace be upon him" took his shoes off during  prayer,  as Gabriel  
informed  him that they were  unclean,  and the people  present  took their shoes  off 
as well, he told them: "Why  have you taken off your shoes?"  Concerning  those  
who take their shoes  off for prayer  An-Nakh'i  said disapproving  the practice,  "I 
wish that someone  in need would  pass by and take these shoes  away (never  to 
return  them)."  Such then was their lenience  on these  affairs.  In fact they used to 
walk barefooted  in muddy  streets,  sit on the mud, and kneel and prostrate  
themselves  in prayer  directly  on the floors  of the mosques.  They  were  wont  to eat 
bread made of wheat  and barley,  both of which  were trodden  by the feet of 
animals  and polluted  with their  urine.  They  made  no effort  to avoid  the sweat  of 
camels  and horses  despite  the fact that both animals  were  constantly  wallowing  in 
impure  things.  Not a single question  concerning  the niceties  of impurities  has 
come  down  to us from them.  Such then was their lenience  in these matters.  But 
the situation  has now come  to such a pass where  a certain  group  of people  who  
consider  their makeup  equivalent  to cleanliness  and say that it is the foundation  
of religion.  They  spend  the greater  part of their time in beautifying  their bodies,  
just as the hairdresser  does with the bride,  but neglect  their hearts  and leave  them  
desolate,  stuffed  with the foul impurities  of pride,  conceit,  ignorance,  hypocrisy,  
and deceit;  and neither  disapprove  of them nor show any amazement  at them.  
Furthermore,  if any one should confine  himself  to the use of stones for 
abstersion,  or walk  barefooted  on the ground,  or pray on the floor  or on the bare  
mats of the mosque  without  spreading  a rug over  either,  or walk  over the rugs (of 
the mosque)  without  leather  overshoes,  or perform  his ablution  with water  from  
a jar belonging  to an old woman  or an irreligious  man, they would  clamour  and 
raise a vociferous  outcry  over  him, call him filthy,  ostracize  him from their midst,  
and disdain  from eating  with him or associating  with him. On the other hand  
they regard  austerity  in attire,  which  is a part of belief,  filth; while make-up  and 
ornamentation  they consider  cleanliness.  See then how the evil has become  good,  
and the good  evil; how the form of religion  has disappeared  just as its truth and 
knowledge  have disappeared.
If you will ask, "Will you then say that those  practices  which  the Sufis have  
started  in connection  with their outward  appearance  and matters  of cleanliness251


Page 254:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
are forbidden  and evil?" I shall say, "Far be it from me to generalize  on this 
subject  and not treat  every  case on its own merit."  Nevertheless  I will say: "This  
excessive  cleaning  and these painful  undertakings,  the preparation  of special  
vessels  and paraphernalia,  the use of overshoes,  wearing  veils for protection  
against  the dust and other  similar  devices,  if they were examined  by themselves  
without  reference  to anything  else, they will be found permissible.  Certain  
situations  and motives  may become  attached  to them and will render  them at 
one time good and at another  evil. That in themselves  they are permissible  is 
quite evident  since he who practises  them does so on his own account  in his 
own body and clothes.  He, therefore,  may do whatever  he wishes,  so long as 
there  is neither  waste  nor extravagance  therein.  They  become  evil when  they are 
made a fundamental  part of religion  and are consequently  advanced  as the 
interpretation  of the statement  of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon him",  "Religion  was founded  on cleanliness."  As a result  those  
who are not very strict in the observance  of all these rules of cleanliness  but, 
like the early Muslims,  are lenient  therein,  are subjected  to harsh strictures.  
Again  they become  evil when  they are performed  for the purpose  of adorning  
the body  and beautifying  it. This, in fact, is hypocrisy,  which  is forbidden.  By 
these  two considerations  will they become  evil.
They are good practices  when their purpose  is utility rather than  
ornamentation;  when he who fails to observe  them is not censured;  when  
prayer  is not delayed  on their account;  and when they do not prevent  the 
individual  from doing something  better or hinder him from pursuing  a 
superior  knowledge  and the like. When  none of these things  is attached  to 
them they are permissible  and may even be considered  meritorious  through  
the good motive  behind  them. But these practices  are possible  only to the 
idle, who if they do not spend  their time in them will waste  it in sleep or 
useless  conversation.  Consequently  to spend  this (otherwise  wasted)  time of 
theirs  in these practices  becomes  the more  worthy,  because  any time spent  in 
purification  renews  the remembrance  of Allah  and that of the acts of worship.  
There  is, therefore,  no harm in them provided  they do not become  evil or 
extravagant.
As to the men of learning  and deeds,  they should  not spend  any of their time  
in these practices  except  what  is necessary.  For to go to excess  is evil just as to 
waste one's life, which  is the best and most precious  pearl,  when it should  be 
preserved  and utilized,  is evil. None  need wonder  at that since the good  works  of 
the righteous  are the evil works  of the Allah's  nearest  devotees.  The idle should  
not neglect  cleanliness  himself  and disapprove  of it in the Sufis claiming  that he is 
thereby  emulating  the Companions.  For to emulate  the Companions  truly is not 
to devote oneself  except to that which is more important  than external  
cleanliness.  Thus it was said to Dawud  Al-Tai  "Why do you not comb your  
beard?"  He replied,  "Do you think  I have nothing  else to do?" For this reason  I 
do not think  that the learned  man or the student,  or the labourer  should  waste  
their time washing  their clothes  in order  to avoid  wearing  the clothes  which  the252


Page 255:
Book  three:  the mysteries  of purification  
laundry-man  has washed  because  they imagine  that the latter  has not cleaned  the 
clothes  well enough.  As a matter  of fact the early Muslims  used to perform  their  
prayers  while wearing  tanned fur-coats,  and none of them was known to 
differentiate  between  laundered  clothes  and tanned  fur-coats  as far as purity  and 
impurity  were concerned.  Rather they avoided  all impurities  wherever  and 
whenever  they saw them  and paid no attention  to remote  and subtle  possibilities.  
They,  however,  scrutinized  very carefully  the subtleties  of hypocrisy  and injustice,  
so that Sufyan  Ath-Thawri  once told a companion  who raised  his eyes to see an 
elaborate  and exquisite  doorway  by which  they had just passed,  "Do not do that!  
For if people  would  not look at this door its owner  would  not have been so 
extravagant.  Verily  those  who look at his door  help him to be extravagant."  Thus  
(the early Muslims)  spent all the efforts  of their minds in pointing  out such  
subtleties  rather  than in speculating  on the remote  possibilities  of impurity.
Therefore  it will be better for the learned  man to Find for himself  an 
ordinary  person  to wash his clothes  carefully  for him, because,  from the point  
of view  of lenience,  this is better.  The ordinary  person  will benefit  by his work  
since he will then give his soul which  urges to evil something  permissible  to 
keep it busy and consequently  keep it from sinning.  For the soul, unless  it is 
kept busy with something,  will lead to trouble.  Furthermore,  if the ordinary  
man wishes  to gain the favour  of the learned  man through  this work,  he will 
find it to be one of the best means  to gain his end. Again,  the time of the 
learned  man is too precious  to be one of the best means  to gain his end.  
Again,  the time of the ordinary  man is spent  in such work,  and he will benefit  
in every  respect.
Let this illustration,  therefore,  serve  men as a reminder  of other  similar  works  
and activities,  to determine  their different  values  and to establish  their order  of 
preference.  For care in preserving  the hours of life and expending  them in 
pursuing  the best is more important  than being particular  and fastidious  
concerning  the minute  affairs  of this world.
Having  acquainted  yourself  with this introduction  and found out that 
purification  has four stages,  then know that in this book we shall not discuss  
anything  except  the fourth  stage which  is the cleanliness  of the body,  because,  in 
the first half of the book we purposely  do not address  ourselves  except  to 
external  and outward  things.
We, therefore,  say that the purification  of the body  is divided  into three parts:  
purification  from  impurities,  purification  from excrements,  and purification  from  
bodily cysts and discharges,  which is accomplished  by such operations  as 
manicuring,  shaving,  depilating  the pubic  hair, circumcision,  and the like of that.253
PART  ONE:  ON PURIFICATION  FROM  IMPURITIES
The discussion  thereof  includes  a Study  of that which  is removed,  the Vehicle  
of Removal,  and the way of Removal.
That  Which  Is Removed
That which  is removed  is impurity.  Substances  are of three kinds:  inanimate


Page 256:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 254
objects,  animate  objects  and parts  of animate  objects.
As to inanimate  objects,  all, except  wine and intoxication  beverages,  are pure.  
As to animate  objects,  all, except  the dog and the pig and their  products,  are pure.  
When  animate  objects  die, they are all impure  except  five, namely  human  beings,  
fish, locusts,  apple  worms,  and, of the same category  as apple  worms,  is every  
food  which  changes,  as well as every  form  of life which  has no flowing  blood  like 
flies beetles,  and the like. Water  is not rendered  impure  when such objects  fall 
into it.
As to the parts of inanimate  objects,  they are of two kinds.  The first comprises  
those  things  which  may be cut off and its rule is the same  as that of dead bodies.  
(One  exception  is) the hair which  is not rendered  impure  by shearing  and death.  
Bones,  however,  are rendered  impure  by death.  The second  comprises  all wet 
things  which  the body  exudes  or emits.  Everything  which  is not subject  to change  
and has no fixed seat like tears and sweat  are pure. But saliva  and the mucus  of 
the nose,  and whatever  things  which  have a fixed seat and are subject  to change,  
are all impure  except  the seed of life like semen  and eggs. Pus, blood,  feces,  and 
urine  are impure  in all animals.  Nothing  is exempted  of these impurities  except  
five things. The first, the remains  of ordure after abstersion  with stones-  
whatever  does not extend  beyond  the orifice  is exempted.  Second,  the mud in the 
streets  and the dust of (dried up) dung, despite  the fact that their impurity  is 
established,  are exempt  only to the extent  to which  they cannot  be avoided,  i.e. 
which is not the result of negligence  or oversight.  Third,  what hangs to the 
bottom  of the shoes of impurities,  of which  the streets  are always  full. This is 
exempt,  after it has been wiped  off, because  of necessity.  Fourth,  the blood  of 
fleas-little  or much-except  when  it goes beyond  the ordinary  limits-whether  it be 
on your own shirt or in some one else's shirt, which  you may wear. Fifth, the 
blood  of pimples  and the pus they discharge.  Ibn 'Umar  once  wiped  off a pimple  
on his face and it bled but he went  ahead  and performed  his prayer  without  first 
washing.  Of the same category  is what chronic  boils discharge  as well as the 
blood  which  issues after phlebotomy,  except  in such cases where  the issue of 
blood  is caused  by an abscess  where  it will be subject  to the same rule which  
governs  the blood of menstruation  and not that of pimples  of which man is 
never  always  free. The toleration  of these five impurities  by the Law shows  that 
the principle  of purity  is lenience  and all that was innovated  therein  is the result  
of obsessions  which  have  no foundation.
The Vehicle  Of Removal
The vehicle  of removal  is either solid or liquid.  The solid is the stone of 
abstersion  which  has been purified  through  being (sun-) dried. It should  be a 
hard,  pure,  and dry stone  but not a relic of any veneration.
As to liquids,  none  of them  removes  impurities  except  water  and not any kind  
of water  at that, but only the pure water  which  has not become  contaminated  
through  its contact  with other bodies.  Again water ceases to be pure when,  
through  contact  with impurities,  it changes  in taste or colour  or odor. If, on the>


Page 257:
Book  three:  the mysteries  of purification  
other  hand it does not change  in any of these,  and its quantity  approaches  two 
hundred  and fifty manes,  which equals  five hundred  Iraqi pounds,  it will not 
become  impure,  because  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon him" said: 'When  water is sufficient  to fill two pitchers  it carries no 
impurities."  According  to AJ-Shafi'i  if it were less, it would  become  impure.  This  
relates  to stagnant  water  only. Running  water,  on the other  hand,  when  polluted  
with impurities,  the ripples  which  have been contaminated  with these  impurities  
become  impure,  except  those  beneath  and below,  because  the ripples  of water  are 
separated  one from the other.  Similarly,  the impurities,  if they should  flow in the 
watercourse,  render  impure  the part in which  they fall as well as the part to the 
right  and left of the part wherein  they fall, if the amount  of water  does not exceed  
two pitchers.  If the flow of the water,  were faster  than the flow of the impurities,  
what lies over the impurities  is pure and what lies below  them is impure,  no 
matter  how far it may move  or how much  it may be, unless  it gathers  in a pond  
or cavity  the size of which  is larger  than two pitchers.  If an amount  of impure  
water,  equal  to two pitchers,  should  gather  in one place,  that water  would  become  
pure if mixed  (with a larger  quantity  of pure water).  This is the position  of al 
Shafi'i.  I had hoped,  however,  that his position  would  be like that of Malik  who  
held that water,  no matter  how meager  its amount  might  become,  would  not be 
rendered  impure  except  through  change  (in taste, colour,  or odor),  because  the 
need for it is great  and to lay down  the condition  of two pitchers  would  simply  
provoke  suspicion  and fear. It has therefore  become  very difficult  to observe  this 
rule and, upon  my life, it is difficult;  those  who would  try and examine  it would  
find that out for themselves.
Furthermore,  I have no doubt  that if such a condition  had been stipulated,  
then Mecca  and Medina,  in view  of the shortage  of running  water  and abundance  
of stagnant  water  in both, would  have been the two most difficult  places for 
achieving  purity.  Yet from the time of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon him" to the last days of his Companions  not a single  crisis  
pertaining  to purification  nor a single question  concerning  the manner  of 
safeguarding  water  from  impurities  had been  reported.  The vessels  in which  their  
water was placed  was handled  by boys and slave-girls  who were not careful  
against  impurities.  Furthermore,  Umar  performed  his ablution  with water from  
the jar of a Christian  woman.  This act of Umar  is just as clear and binding  as a 
genuine  tradition  which  fulfils  all requirements  in establishing  that water  becomes  
impure  only  when  it changes  (in taste,  or colour,  or odor).  Otherwise  the impurity  
of the Christian  woman  and that of her vessels  are quite evident  and are very  
readily  discerned.  Therefore  this position  becomes  untenable.  The fact that no 
question  concerning  it arose  during  the days of the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him" and his Companions  is one proof  for its being  
untenable;  the action  of Umar  is another;  while  a third proof  is found  in the fact 
that the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" was wont  
to incline  the water  vessel  to the cat and to leave  all vessels  unprotected  against  it 
even after  he had seen it eat a mouse.  Nowhere  in their  land were tanks  set apart255


Page 258:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
for cats to drink.  Nor did the cats go down  to the bottom  of the well for water.
The fourth  proof  is that Al-Shafi'i  has definitely  said that water  with which  a 
certain  impurity  has been washed  was pure, as long as it did not undergo  any 
change  (in taste,  or colour,  or odor),  and was impure  whenever  it did undergo  any 
such change.  And what difference  is there between  water contaminated  with  
impurities  through  its own contact  with them or through  the contact  of 
impurities  with it? And  what  sense  is there  in saying  that the force  of the contact  
of water prevents  impurity  although  contact  in itself does not hinder the 
intermixture  of impurity?  If the one is to be explained  on the grounds  of need  
and necessity,  need and necessity  are also present  in the other. There is no 
difference  between  pouring  water into a vessel wherein  there is an impure  
garment  and throwing  the impure  garment  in a vessel wherein  there is pure  
water-both  being  ordinary  practices  in laundry  and washing.
A fifth proof  is found  in the fact that it was the practice  to perform  abstersion  
along the edges of small bodies  of running  water. There is no disagreement  
concerning  the position  of Al-Shafi'i  that if urine should  fall into running  water  
and the water  does not undergo  any change  (in taste, or colour  or odor),  it will 
still remain  permissible  to use the water for ablution  no matter  how small the 
quantity.  And what  difference  is there  between  running  and still water.  Upon  my 
life, which  is the stronger  argument:  to base the decision  on the lack of change  in 
the water  or on the force of its flow? Furthermore,  what are the limitations  of 
this force?  Does  it extend  to the water  which  flows  within  the pipes  of baths  or 
not? If it does not extend  to the water  which  flows within  the pipes of baths,  
what  accounts  for the difference?  And if it does extend  to such water  that is the 
difference  between  what falls into it and what falls into its course  as it is poured  
out from  vessels  over the body,  when  both  are running  waters?  Furthermore,  if it 
is to be ruled that water which flows over a solid and stationary  impurity  is 
impure,  although  it does not undergo  any change,  and that it remains  impure  
until a quantity  equal to two pitchers  collects  in a small pond, (it should  be 
remembered)  that urine is intermixed  with running  water  more readily  than any 
solid and stationary  object  possibly  could.  And what  difference  is there between  
the solid and liquid (impurities)  when the water  is the same and admixture  is 
more  through-going  than mere  contact?  The sixth proof  is found  in the fact that 
if a pound  of urine  was poured  into a quantity  of water  equal  to two pitchers  and 
then the water  was distributed  into different  vessels.  Water  drawn  from any of 
these  vessels  is pure;  yet it is well known  that urine,  though  a small  quantity  of it, 
contaminates  all. Which  is more convincing  to explain;  that the water  is pure  
because  it underwent  no change,  or because  of its large quantity,  even after that 
quantity  has ceased  to be large, and despite  the knowledge  that a part of the 
impurity  still exists  in the reminder  of that water?  A seventh  proof  is seen in the 
fact that in bygone  day's ascetics  constantly  performed  their ablutions  in public  
baths and dipped  their hands  and vessels  in tanks despite  the small quantity  of 
water these tanks contained  and despite  their knowledge  that both pure and 
impure  hands  have  been  dipped  into these  tanks.256


Page 259:
Book  three:  the mysteries  of purification
These  incidents  together  with urgent  need and necessity  strengthen  the belief  
that only the lack of any change  in the water was taken into consideration  
whenever  its purity was questioned,  relying thereby  on the words of the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" when he said:  
"Water  was created  pure and nothing  renders  it impure  except that which  
changes  its taste or colour  or odor.'  There  is a basic  truth  in this, namely  that it is 
the property  of every  liquid  to transform  whatever  may fall into it into its own,  
provided  that liquid  be the dominant  element  of the two. In this way, just as the 
dog when  it falls into a mine  of salt, is itself  transformed  into salt, and through  its 
transformation  into salt and its loss of entity,  becomes  pure, so is the case with  
vinegar  and milk,  whenever  they are placed  in water  which  is dominant,  they lose 
their properties  and acquire  those  of the water,  unless  the vinegar  and the milk be 
the dominant  elements,  in which  case they will prevail.  Their  prevalence  is known  
through  the presence  of their taste, or colour  or odor.  This then is the criterion  
(whereby  things  are determined  and judged).  To it the Law has pointed  in the 
case of the water  which  is capable  of removing  impurities.  It is, therefore,  worthy  
of being  relied  upon. Consequendy,  through  it the guilt is lifted (off those  who  
use water  which  the fastidious  deem  impure),  and the meaning  (of the tradition  
that water  was created  pure) is explained  through  it since water prevails  over  
impurities  and renders  the objects  pure, just as it was shown  in the case of the 
two pitchers,  as well as in the case of the used water,  and the running  water,  and 
in the case of inclining  the vessel  for the cat.
Do not, however,  think  that that is an exemption,  for it were so it would  have  
been like the remains  of ordure  after abstersion  and the blood  of fleas: it would  
be deemed  pure until (through  excess)  it makes  the water  impure.  Even  when  the 
quantity  is small, water is not rendered  impure  by articles  steeped  or washed  
therein  or by a cat licking  therefrom.
As to the saying  of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon  him" that water  carries  no impurities,  it is in itself  ambiguous,  for whenever  
water  undergoes  change  it carries  impurities.  If it be said that the Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" meant  with his words  that water  
carries  no impurities  so long  as it undergoes  no change,  it will then be possible  to 
say that in most cases water  does not undergo  any change  through  its contact  
with ordinary  impurities.  Furthermore,  the words of the tradition  imply the 
acceptance  that when the quantity  of water  is short of two pitchers,  the water  
carries  impurities  when  brought  into contact  with them.  Nevertheless,  it is quite  
possible  to ignore  the implied  meaning  of the tradition  for lesser  reasons  than  
those  we have  already  mentioned  in those  seven  proofs.
The apparent  meaning  of the statement  of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him" that water  carries  no impurities  is to negate  the 
act of carrying  in other  words  it transform  impurities  to its own property,  just as 
we say that a mine  of salt will not hold a dog or anything  else but will decompose  
and transform  them  into salt. Men perform  their abstersion  in small  waters  and 
streamlets  and dip impure  vessels  therein,  and then wonder  whether  or not the257


Page 260:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
water has undergone  any perceptible  change.  It has therefore  become  evident  
that whenever  the quantity  of waters  exceeds  two pitchers,  ordinary  impurities  do 
not cause  it to undergo  any change.
If you should  say that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon  him" had said that water  carries  no impurities,  no matter  how much  these  
impurities  increase,  then the argument  would  be turned  against  you, because  
whenever  the impurities  increase  in quantity,  water  would  really  and actually  carry  
them. For this reason,  I would  say that it is imperative  for both schools  to be 
specific  and limit their  interpretation  to the ordinary  impurities.
In short,  in the case of ordinary  impurities,  I am inclined  to be tolerant  and 
lenient,  following  therein  the example  of the early  Muslims  and hoping  thereby  to 
do away  with fears and suspicions.  In that spirit have I given  my legal opinions  
concerning  disputed  problems  of purity.258
THE Way OF REMOVAL
If an impurity  is an impurity  in effect, i.e. it has no palpable  body, it is 
sufficient  to run water  over  all its parts.  But if it is an impurity  in fact, i.e. physical  
it is necessary  to remove  the physical.  The persistence  of the taste indicates  the 
persistence  of the physical.  The same  is true of the persistence  of colour  except  in 
such cases where the impurity  leaves an indelible  stain, in which event it is 
exempted,  provided  it has been thoroughly  rubbed and washed.  But the 
persistence  of odor  indicates  the persistence  of the physical  and in not exempted  
except  in such cases where  the object  has a strong  odor which  is difficult  to 
remove;  in which  event soaking  it in water and wringing  it several  successive  
times  will do instead  of rubbing  and washing  as in the case of the persistence  of 
colour.  It will do away with fear and suspicion  to know  that things  have been  
created  pure. Objects  on which  impurities  are not positively  seen may be used in 
prayer, and one should not resort to deduction  to prove the presence  of 
impurities.
PART  TWO:  ON PURIFICATION  FROM  EXCREMENTS
The purification  from excrements  includes  performing  ablution,  bathing,  
purification  with clean sand, and all are preceded  by abstersion.  We shall now  
state the way of performing  them in the prescribed  order together  with their  
etiquette  and rules, beginning  with the reason  for ablution  and the etiquette  of 
answering  the call of nature.
THE ETIQUETTE  OF ANSWERING  THE Call OF NATURE
One should  go into the wilderness  far from the eyes of onlookers  He should  
shelter  himself  behind  something  whenever  possible  and should  not uncover  his 
nakedness  before  he reaches  the place  of squatting.  He should  not face the sun or 
the moon  with his nakedness,  nor should  he face the Qiblah  or turn his back  
unto it when  his nakedness  is uncovered  except  when  he is within  a house,  and 
even  then it is better  to avoid  that position.  It is permissible  for him,  when  in the 
wilderness,  to shelter  himself  behind  his camel  or use for that purpose  his skirt


Page 261:
Book  three:  the mysteries  of purification
He should  avoid  squatting  down  (for the purpose  of answering  the call of nature)  
in any place  where  it is customary  for men to meet for conversation.  He should  
not urinate  in still water,  or under  a fruit tree, or in any enclosure.  When  urinating  
he should  keep  away  from  hard surface  and windy  places  in order  to avoid  spatter  
and splash.  When  he squats  down  to answer  the call of nature,  he should  support  
himself  on the left leg. When  entering  a house  to urinate  he should  advance  with  
the left leg first and when he leaves he should advance  with the right.  
Furthermore,  he should  not urinate  while standing.  A'ishah  said: "He who tells 
that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" was wont  
to urinate  standing,  believe  him not. Umar  also said: "The Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" once saw me urinating  while  standing  
and he said to me: 'O Umar!  Do not urinate  standing!'  from this time on, I've 
never urinated  while standing."  Yet in certain  instances,  it is allowed  since  
Hudhaifah  related  that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon him" once urinated  standing  and that Hudhaifah  then brought  him water  
for ablution  which  he performed  and wiped  his shoes  off. Again  no one should  
urinate  in the bath tub. In this connection  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon him" said that most of men's fears and suspicions  
whether  or not things  are pure result  from urinating  in bath tubs.  Ibn al-Mubarak  
said: "However,  if the water  in the bath tub be running  water,  then there is no 
harm  in urinating  therein."  When  a person  proceeds  to answer  the call of nature,  
he should  not take with him anything  which  contains  the name  of Allah  or of His 
Apostle.  He should  not enter the water-closet  bareheaded,  and on entering  he 
should  say, "I seek refuge  in Allah against  the accursed  Satan, the filthy, the 
impure,  the abominable,  the pernicious".  On leaving  the water-closet  he should  
say, "praise  be to Allah  Who  has removed  from  me that which  is harmful  and has 
left me that which  is useful."  He should  say this after  he had left the water-closet.  
He should  prepare  the stones  (for abstersion)  before  squatting,  and should  not 
perform  the act of abstersion  over the place  where  he had defecated.  He should  
take the utmost  pains  in cleaning  his penis  from  urine  by shaking  it to and from  
three times and by stroking  its lower  extremity  with his hand. Nevertheless,  he 
should  not worry  too much  over the state of his cleanliness  lest he become  victim  
to an obsession  which  will wear him out. If he should  feel something  wet there,  
let him suppose  that it is nothing  but some of the water (with which he 
performed  the act of abstersion).  If this does not allay his suspicion  let him 
sprinkle  some water on the place so that he can then assure  himself  that the 
wetness  is caused  by water  not by urine.  Consequently,  he will not allow  Satan  to 
prevail  over him through  fear and suspicion.  The Prophet  himself,  we are told in 
a tradition,  has done  the same  thing,  namely,  sprinkled  water  over his orifice.  The  
person  who was wont  to exert the least effort  in affecting  the cleanliness  of his 
orifice  was the most  learned  among  them,  for fear and obsessions  indicate  lack of 
learning  and ignorance.
In a tradition  Salman  Al-Farisi  said: 'The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon him" taught  us everything,  even how to answer  the call of259


Page 262:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
nature:  How commanded  us not to perform  the act of abstersion  with either  
bone or (dried)  dung, and forbade  us to face the Qiblah  when defecating  or 
urinating."  A certain  Bedouin  having  fought  with one of the Companions  told 
him, "You  do not even know  how to defecate."  The Companion  answered  and 
said: " Yea, by your father ’s beards,  I do, and I am a past master  at it. I go out far 
into the wilderness,  prepare  the stones  (for abstersion),  face the wormwood,  turn  
my back to the wind,  squat  like the deer, and stoop  raising  my posterior  as the 
ostrich  raises its tail," (The wormwood  is an aromatic  desert  plant,  squatting  is 
crouch-resting  on his toes, and stooping  is raising  the posterior  part).
It is sometimes  allowed  for the man to urinate  close to his companion  
provided  he be concealed  and sheltered.  The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon  him" has done that despite  his extreme  shyness,  in order  to 
show  men that it was permissible.260
The Way Of Abstersion
One should  perform  the abstersion  for his posterior  orifice  with three  stones.  
If the orifice  is cleansed  therewith,  the three stones  will suffice,  otherwise,  a 
fourth  stone must be used, and if this proves  sufficient,  a fifth must be used,  
because  (although)  only cleanliness  is necessary,  the use of an odd number  (of 
stones)  is desirable.  The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" said: 'When  you employs  stones  for your abstersion,  use an odd number."  
In performing  the abstersion,  the person  should  hold the stone  with his left hand,  
place  it at the fore-part  of his orifice  just before  the seat of impurity,  and run it 
over  with horizontal  and circular  motion  to the rear part. He should  then take the 
second  stone,  place  it at the rear part and run it over to the forepart.  Taking  then  
the third  stone  he should  run it around  the orifice.  If he should  not be able to run 
the stone  around  the orifice,  he might  perform  the act in parts.
He then should  take a large stone  with his right  and his penis  with the left 
and with it(the  left) move  the penis  thereby  wiping  it against  the stone  in three  
different  places,  or against  three stones,  or against  three  different  places  on a 
wall, until he sees wetness  on the place  where  he had wiped  his penis.  If that 
is accomplished  after he wiped  it twice,  he should  do it a third time. This is 
obligatory  if he wishes  to limit himself  to the use of stones.  If that is 
accomplished  after he had wiped  his penis four times against  the stone,  it 
would  be desirable  to wipe it a fifth time for the sake of maintaining  an odd 
number.
He should  then move  to another  place  and perform  the act of abstersion  with  
water,  pouring  it over the seat of excrement  and rubbing  it with the left until  
nothing  which  the palm  of the hand  could  feel is left. He should  not go to excess  
by trying  to remove  the parts which  are still within  the orifice  because  such a 
thing  would  give rise to obsession.  He should  realize  that whatever  water  cannot  
reach  lies within,  and these  parts which  lie within  are not subject  to the rule that 
governs  impurities  unless  they come  out. And everything  which  is external  and 
which  is subject  to the rule that governs  impurities  fulfils  the definition  of purity


Page 263:
Book  three:  the mysteries  of purification  
when the water  reaches  and removes  it. There  is, therefore,  no sense in being  
victim  to an obsession  in this respect.
In the end of abstersion  one should  say: "O my God! Purify  my heart  from  
hypocrisy,  and make  my body  chaste."  He then should  wipe his hand against  a 
wall or earth for removing  any odor  which  might  have persisted  thereon.  The  
use of both stones  and water  together  is desirable,  as it was related  that when  
Allah revealed  unto the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon him" the verse,  "Therein  are men who aspire  to purity,  and Allah loves  
the purified,"  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon  
him" said to the people  of Quba,  "What  is the purity  for which  Allah has 
herewith  praised  you?" They said: "We were wont to use both stones  and 
water  (for abstersion)."261
The Way Of Performing  Ablution
When one is through  with abstersion,  he should  proceed  to perform  his 
ablution,  for never  has the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon  him" been seen emerging  after he had answered  the call of nature  without  
immediately  performing  the ablution.  The person  should  commence  with the use 
of the toothpick.  Thus the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon him" said: "Your  mouths  are the pathways  of the Qur'an.  Render  them,  
therefore  clean  with toothpicks."  His purpose,  when  using  the toothpick,  should  
be the purification  of his mouth  for the reading  of the Qur'an,  and the invocation  
of Allah  in prayer.  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" said: "One prayer  after the use of the toothpick  is better  than seventy  and 
five prayers  without  the use of the toothpick."  And again,"  Had it not been for 
my fear to overburden  my people,  I would  have commanded  them to use the 
toothpick  before  every  prayer",  And again "Why  do you come before  me with  
yellow  teeth?  Use toothpicks."  He also was wont to use the toothpick  several  
times every  night.  It was also related  that Ibn Abbas  once said: "The Messenger  
of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" has so repeatedly  commanded  
us to use the toothpick  that we expected  him soon to receive  a revelation  on its 
use." The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" also said:  
"Use  ye the toothpick:  it is a purifier  for the mouth  and well-pleasing  unto  Allah."  
Ali said: "The toothpick  develops  and strengthens  the memory  and banishes  
sluggishness."  Furthermore,  it was customary  for the Companions  of the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" to go about  with  
their toothpicks  carried  behind  the ears. The manner  of its use. For a toothpick  men  
should  use the Arak  wood or other rough  branches  which remove  the yellow  
deposits  around  the teeth.  The toothpick  should  be used both horizontally  and 
vertically,  and if one should  limit himself  to one of the two motions,  let him use 
it horizontally.
It is desirable  to use the toothpick  prior to every prayer  and prior to every  
ablution  whether  it is followed  with prayer  or not. Equally  desirable  is its use 
when the taste of the mouth  has become  bad as a result of sleep, or long


Page 264:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 262
abstinence  from  food,  or eating  a thing  of unpleasant  smell.
After completing  the cleansing  of his mouth  with the toothpick  the person  
should  then proceed  with his ablution  facing  therein  the Qiblah,  and saying,  "In 
the name of Allah the Merciful,  the Compassionate."  The Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "There  is no ablution  to him who  
does not call upon the name of Allah,"  i.e., no complete  ablution.  One should  
then say: "(O Allah!)  I seek refuge  in you from the power  of the devil. I seek  
refuge  in you O Allah  lest they should  come  and surround  me." He then should  
wash his hands  three times  before  putting  them  into the vessel  and should  say, 
"O Allah,  I ask you for luck and blessing,  and seek refuge  in you against  ill-luck  
and destruction."  His purpose  should  be the removal  of excrements  or making  
prayer  lawful.  He should  bear that purpose  in mind  until he had washed  his face.  
If, however,  he happens  to forget  the purpose  of his ablution  just before  he 
washes  his face, he will not be penalized  for it. He then should  take up a handful  
of water  with his right,  and rinse  his mouth  with it thrice  and gargle,  allowing  the 
water  to reach  his throat,  except  when  he is fasting,  at which  time he should  take 
it easy (lest  he swallow  any of it).
Having  done that he should  say, "O Allah,  Help me to recite  Your  book  and 
to exalt  Your  name."  Thereupon  he should  take up another  handful  and inhale  it 
thrice,  forcing  it with his breath  up his nose and flushing  thereby  its cartilages,  
and then force the water  out by exhaling.  As he sniffs the water  he should  say: 
"O Allah! Grant  me (to enjoy)  the perfumes  of the Garden  and bestow  mercy  
upon me." As he exhales  in order  to force the water  out of his nose he should  
say, "O Allah! I seek refuge  in You against  the stench  of Hell and evil of the 
world."  This is said because  inhaling  constitutes  drawing  in and exhaling  is 
removal  and rejection.
He then should  take another  handful  of water  for his face and should  wash  it
from the beginning  of the flat part of the forehead  to the extremity  of the fore­
part of the chin lengthwise,  and from ear to ear laterally.  The two temples  which  
are on either  side of the forehead  are not included  in the face but form a part of 
the head.  The water  is allowed  to reach  the edge of the bangs  which  women  are 
wont  to affect:  It is that part which  lies at the side of the face when  the end of a 
thread  is placed  upon the top of the ear, and the other end is placed  upon the 
comer  of the forehead.  The water,  however,  is allowed  to reach  the four parts of 
face where, the hair grows, namely,  the eyebrows,  the mustache,  the side 
whiskers,  and the eyelashes  which  are, for the most  part sparse.  The side whiskers  
are that part of the beard  which  grows  parallel  to and alongside  the ears. Water  
should  also be allowed  to reach  the base of sparse  but not thick beards,  i.e. the 
frontal  part of the face. The rule which  governs  the hair between  the lower  lip 
and the chin is the same  as that which  governs  the beard,  whether  thick  or sparse.  
He should  (wash  his face in this prescribed  manner)  thrice  and then pour  water  
the long part of his beard,  and work  his fingers  in and clean the eye holes over
and (the inner corners  of the eyes) where  the dirt which  they discharge  collects  
and (the outer comers)  where the kohl gathers,  for it was related  that the


Page 265:
Book  three:  the mysteries  of purification  
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" himself  did that.  
When the person  washes  his eyes his wish should  be that sin would  depart  
therefrom.  Similarly  at the washing  of every  member  of his body,  he should  wish  
for the departure  of sin therefrom.  As he washes  his face, he should  say, "O 
Allah!  Cleanse  You my face with Your  light  when  You cleanses  the faces  of Your  
saints;  and blacken  not my face with Your  darkness  when  You renders  the faces  
of Your  enemies  black."  When  washing  his face, he should  also let water  flow in 
the interstices  of his beard,  for, it is desirable.
He should  then wash his arms up to the elbows  three times,  (When  washing  
his hands)  he should  move  the ring around  his finger.  He then should  draw his 
wetted  right hand over the fore-part  of his head, (raising  his head gear with the 
left), and should  apply water to the upper part of the upper arm. For (the 
believers)  will appear on the day of resurrection  with whiteness  on their  
foreheads,  wrists,  and ankles,  from the effect  of ablution.  Similarly,  a tradition  
declares  that the Prophet  said: " Whoever  is able to clean the fore-part  of his 
head let him do so." It has also been related  that the whiteness  appears  on those  
parts  of the body  which  are washed  at the time of ablution.
One should  begin  with the washing  of his right hand and say: "O Allah!  (On 
the day of judgment)  hand  me the book  of my actions  in my right  hand  and judge  
me with lenience."  When  he washes  his left he should  say, "I beseech  You O 
Allah,  hand me not the book  of my action  in my left or from behind  my back."  
He then should  proceed  to wipe his head thoroughly  by soaking  his hands  in the 
water,  bringing  the tips of their fingers,  both the right and the left, together,  
placing  them  on the forepart  of the head,  running  them  over  to the opposite  side,  
and finally  bringing  them back again to the forepart.  All this constitutes  one 
wiping.  He should  go through  it thrice  and say, "Cover  me with Your  mercy,  O 
Allah,  and shower  upon  me of Your  blessings.  Give me to sit in the shadow  of 
Your  throne  on that day when  there  will be no shade  except  Your  own."  He then  
should  wipe his ears, both outside  and inside,  with fresh water.  To do this, he 
should  put the tips of his forefingers  into his ears and twist  them  round,  passing  
his thumbs  at the same time over their beak. He then should  place  the palms  of 
his hands over the outer part of his ears, repeating  the act thrice and saying,  
"Make  me O Allah  one of those  who hear and pattern  their work  in accordance  
to the best of what  they hear. O Allah!  Let me hear the crier  of Paradise  with the 
righteous."  He should then wipe his neck with fresh water, because  the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: Wiping  the 
neck safeguards  against  being  shackled  on the day of resurrection."  As he wipes  
his neck he should  say, "O Allah!  Release  my neck from (the yoke of) fire and 
save You me from the chains  and shackles."  He should  then wash  his right foot  
thrice  and, with his left hand,  pass his fingers  between  his toes from  the bottom  
up, beginning  with the little toe of the right foot and ending  with the little toe of 
the left. (As he washes  his right  foot) he should  say, "O Allah,  steady  my foot on 
the narrow  bridge  on that day when  feet slip down  into the fires of Hell."  And as 
he washes  his left: foot he should  say, "I seek your aid O Allah  lest my foot263


Page 266:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
should  slip off the bridge  on that day when  the feet of the hypocrites  slip." (In 
washing  his feet) he should  let the water  reach  half  way up his legs. When  he is 
through,  he should  turn his head up to heaven  and say, "I testify  that there is no 
god but Allah,  that He has no associate,  and that Muhammad  is His servant  and 
aposde.  Glory  be to You O Allah,  and the praise  be Your,  for there  is no god but 
You. I have done  evil and sinned  against  my own soul. I beg Your  forgiveness  O 
Allah,  and I hearken  back  unto You. Forgive  my sin and bestow  mercy  upon  me: 
You are Oft-Forgiving,  Most Merciful.  Give me to be penitent  O Allah, and 
make me pure. Grant  me to be one of Your righteous  servants  and make me 
patient  and grateful.  Help me always  to remember  Your  name,  and to praise  You  
day and night."  It is said that whoever  repeats  this (collect)  after performing  his 
ablutions  will have  the seal of approval  affixed  to his performance  and will have  a 
place  prepared  for him beneath  the throne,  wherefrom  he will continue  to praise  
Allah  and exalt His Holy Name.  His reward  will be preserved  for him until the 
day of resurrection.
Several  things are undesirable  during  ablution.  Of these is to wash (each  
member)  more  than thrice.  Whoever  goes beyond  the three  transgresses.  Another  
undesirable  thing  is to be extravagant  in the use of water.  The Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" performed  his ablution,  washing  each  
member  thrice,  and said: "Whoever  goes beyond  three transgresses  and does  
evil."  And again,  "There  will rise among  this people  some  who will be extravagant  
in their  supplications  and purity"  It is also said: "A sure sign of weakness  in man's  
learning  is his fondness  for water  during  the act of purification."  Ibrahim  Ibn 
Adham  said: "Obsessions  grow out of (fastidiousness  in) purification."  Among  
the undesirable  things  also are speaking  during  ablution  and splashing  the face 
with water.  Others  also objected  to the use of towels  after ablution  saying  that 
the water  used in the act is weighed  on the day of Judgement.  This was said by 
both Sa'id Ibn Al-Musayyab  and Az-Zuhri.  But Mu'adh  related that the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" himself  wiped  his 
face (after  ablution)  with the end of his garment.  'A'ishah  also related  that he had 
a towel which he used after ablution.  The authenticity  of this tradition  has, 
however,  been questioned.  It is also undesirable  to perform  the act of ablution  
from  water  contained  in brass  vessels;  or to use for that purpose  water  which  has 
been heated  in the sun. This latter  thing  is undesirable  for medical  reasons.  The  
objection  to the use of water contained  in brass vessels  was related  on the 
authority  of Ibn 'Umar  and Abu Hurairah.  A certain  person  said: "I brought  out 
for Shu'bah  water in brass vessel but he refused  to perform  his ablution  
therefrom."  In this objection  to brass vessels  he followed  the example  of Ibn 
'Umar  and Abu Hurairah.
When  one completes  his ablution  and proceeds  to pray he must,  no doubt,  be 
aware  of his external  purity,  the purity  which  men behold  and see. He should,  
however,  be ashamed  of communing  with Allah  without  first purifying  his heart,  
which  Allah beholds  and sees. He should  know  with certainty  that the purity  of 
the heart is accomplished  through  repentance,  putting  aside blameworthy  traits,264


Page 267:
Book  three:  the mysteries  of purification  
and laying hold on those which are praiseworthy.  He who limits himself  to 
external  purity  and cleanliness  is like the person  who, desiring  to invite  a king to 
his house,  embarks  on the task of plastering  and whitewashing  its outer  gate, but 
neglects  the interior,  leaving  it stuffed  with all manner  of dirt and filth. Such a 
man is best fitted for contempt  and perdidon.  But Allah  knows  best.
The Excellence  Of Ablution
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said:  
"Whoever  performs  his abludon  well and prostrates  himself  twice in prayer  
without  allowing  anything  worldly  to distract  his mind,  will be absolved  of all his 
sins, and will become  as innocent  as he was when  he was born Or according  to 
another  version  "without  permitting  his mind to wander,  will be forgiven  all his 
past sins."  The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" also 
said: "Let me tell you wherewith  Allah atones  sin and raises the ranks (of the 
faithful):  Performing  the abludon  though  in distress,  frequenting  the mosques,  
and looking  forward  for the time of the next prayer.  Verily  this is the threefold  
bond."  The Messenger  of AJlah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him"  
performed  the ablution  throwing  water  once on every  member  and said: "Prayer  
is unacceptable  before  Allah except  after such ablution."  He performed  the 
ablution  throwing  water twice and said: "Whoever  performs  the ablution  
throwing  water  twice  on every  member  will twice  receive  his reward  from  Allah."  
Finally,  he performed  the ablution  throwing  water thrice and said: "This is my 
manner  of ablution  and that of the prophets  before  me and that of Abraham,  the 
Friend  of the Merciful  Allah."  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" also said: "He who will remember  Allah  when  he performs  
his ablution  will have his whole body purified  by Allah. But he who will not 
remember  Allah at his ablution  will not have his body purified  except  in those  
places  where  the water  was applied."  And again,  "He who performs  the ablution  
while pure, will be credited  with ten good deeds by Allah."  He also said: "An 
ablution  upon ablution  is like a light upon light."  All this is to urge and induce  
men to repeat  and renew  their ablution.  The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon him" also said: "When  a Muslim,  during  the act of ablution,  
rinses his mouth,  the sins leave it; when he blows his nose, they are gone  
therefrom;  when he washes  his hands,  the sins, even those beneath  his finger ­
nails, are removed;  when  he washes  his head,  he rids it of its sins, even those  in 
and behind  his ears, when  he washes  his feet, he cleanses  them from sins, even  
those  beneath  his toe-nails.  Then,  and only then,  will his going  to the mosque  and 
his prayer  therein  be meritorious.  It has also been related  that he who is pure has 
the same reward  as he who is fasting.  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon  him" also said: "Whoever  performs  his ablution  well, and then  
lifts his head unto heaven  and says, 'I testify  that there  is no god but Allah  alone,  
He has no associate,  and I testify  that Muhammad  is His servant,  the Messenger  
of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him",  the eight  gates  of Paradise  will 
be flung open before  him and he will enter therein  through  whichever  gate he265
I


Page 268:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
may desire."  Said Umar  "Good  ablution  drives  away Satan from you." Mujahid  
also said: "He who is able to go to bed purified,  remembering  Allah  and penitent,  
let him do so, for souls are brought  back to life in the same condition  in which  
they were  when  taken  away."266
The way of bathing
One should  place the vessel which contains  the water to his right, and 
repeating  the Basmalah,  he should  wash  his hands,  thrice,  then perform  the act of 
abstersion,  as has been already  described,  removing  off his body whatever  
impurities  it has. He then should  perform  the ablution  of prayer  in the manner  
already  described  with the exception  of the washing  of the feet which  he should  
for the time being defer because  to wash the feet and then step on the earth  
(which  is not clean)  would  be waste  of water.  He then should  pour  water  over his 
head,  thrice  over the right side and thrice  over the left. He then should  rub his 
tody  on either  side, the front  and the back;  let the water  flow into the interstices  
of his beard making  it reach the base of the hair whether  thick or sparse.  A 
woman,  however,  need not undo her braids  unless  she is certain  that without  
undoing  them the water  will not penetrate  into the interstices  of her hair. The  
person  should  not forget  those parts of the body which  are bent or concealed,  
but should  guard  against  touching  his penis.  Should  he touch  his penis,  he should  
perform  the act of ablution  all over again.  If, however,  he has already  performed  
his ablution  before  bathing  he need not go through  it again.
These  then are the rules of ablution  and bathing.  We have discussed  those  
elements  in them which  are indispensable  for the traveller  on the path of the 
hereafter  to know and to do. If on special occasions  and under unusual  
circumstances  he may need other points  besides  these,  he should  refer himself  
concerning  them  to the books  of jurisprudence.
Of all we have discussed  pertaining  to bathing,  two things  are obligatory:  good  
intention  and the washing  of the whole  body.  In the case of ablution  (six things)  
are obligatory:  good intention,  washing  the face, washing  the arms up to the 
elbows,  wiping  the head, washing  the feet including  the heels, and finally  the 
observation  of such sequence  in performing  ablution.  Washing  the different  
organs  of the body in uninterrupted  succession,  i.e. to wash the second  member  
before  the first has dried,  and the third before  the second  has and so on), is not 
obligatory.  Bathing  ablution  is obligatory  after four things:  after the emission  
semen,  after the two places  of circumcision  meet together,  after menstruation,  
and after childbirth.  Other  than these is simply  ordained  by custom  after the 
usage of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him"  
(sunnah) y such as the major  ablution  of the two feasts,  Al-Fitr  and Al-Adha,  the 
major  ablution  of the Friday  and the different  feasts,  the major  ablution  of the 
ihram,  that of the standing  on 'Arafah  and Muzdalifah,  and at entering  Mecca.  
Also performed  after the usage  of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace be upon him" are the three major ablutions  during  the three days of 
Tashriq,  the major  ablution  of the farewell  circumambulation,  according  to some,


Page 269:
Book  three:  the mysteries  of purification  -----------------------------------------
the major  ablution  of the unbeliever  when  he embraces  Islam and is under  no 
obligation  to perform  it by reason  of sexual  intercourse  and the discharge  of 
semen,  the insane  when  he regains  his sanity,  and the person  who has washed  a 
dead body.  All these  are desirable.267
The way of Purification  with clean Sand
If, after trying  earnesdy  to find water,  a person  is unable  to secure  any, or is 
prevented  by the presence  of some beast or obstacle  from reaching  the water  
supply,  or whenever  the water  is needed  for the quenching  of his thirst  or that of 
his companion,  or whenever  it belongs  to someone  else who declines  to sell any 
of it except  for too high a price, or when the person  himself  happens  to be 
suffering  from a wound  or an ailment,  and consequently  fears that the use of 
water may result in the infection  of the member  or in his acute sickness,  he 
should  wait until the time for the fulfillment  of the ordinance  arrives  and then  
proceed  to an elevated  land the soil of which  is pure, fine, and soft so that it is 
easily  blown  into dust.  There,  with his fingers  held closely  together,  he should  pat 
his palms  over the sand,  and lifting  them  to his face, he should  wipe  every  part of 
it once. As he does that he should  purpose  in his mind the making  of prayer  
permissible.  In wiping  his face, he is not required  to force the dust beneath  the 
hair whether  it be sparse  or thick.  He should,  however,  make  an effort  to wipe  his 
whole  face with the dust. This can be accomplished  with one single  stroke,  since  
the width  of the face does not exceed  that of the two palms.  In deciding  whether  
or not he has covered  his whole face, his own opinion  is sufficient.  He then  
should  remove  his ring and pat his palms  over the sand a second  time, during  
which  he should  hold his fingers  wide apart. Having  done this, he should  place  
the back of the fingers  of his right hand over the front  part of the fingers  of his 
left in such a way that the tips of the fingers  of the one hand will not project  
beyond  the edge of the forefinger  of the other. His hands in this position,  he 
should  then run his left hand over the back of his right forearm  up to the elbow.  
He then should  turn over his hand so that the hollow  of his left palm rests over  
the inner side of his right forearm  by the elbow  and then should  run it down  
towards  the wrist  and finish  by stroking  the outer  side of his right thumb  with the 
inner  of his left. He then should  do the same thing  for his left arm. After  that he 
should  wipe his two palms  against  each other and pass the fingers  of the one 
hand between  those  of the other.  The purpose  of this regulation  is to cover  both  
arms completely  up to the elbows  through  a single  patting  of the palms  over the 
sand. If this proves  impossible  the person  can pat his palms  over the sand one or 
more times. Having  fulfilled  this and performed  the ordained  prayer  he may  
proceed  to perform  any supererogatory  prayer  he wishes.  If he wishes  to combine  
the enactment  of two rites he should  perform  the act of purification  with sand  
(Tayammumj  over again prior to the enactment  of the second  rite. Thus every  
ordained  rite should  be preceded  by a single  act of Tayammum.


Page 270:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 268
PART  THREE:  ON CLEANLINESS  AND CLEANSING  FROM  THE EXTERNAL  
BODILY  CYSTS  AND DISCHARGES
which  are of  Two Kinds:  Discharges  and cysts
The First Kind:  The Discharges  And The  
Wet Excretions  Of The Body
These  comprise  eight:
The first: That which  adheres  to the hair of the head such as dirt and lice. 
Cleansing  the head from these through  washing,  combing  and the use of 
ointment  for the orderly  arrangement  of the hair is desirable.  The Messenger  of 
Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" was wont  to anoint  and comb  his 
hair once a week. Furthermore,  he used to command  (his followers)  to do the 
same,  saying,  "Anoint  your hair once a week."  He also said: "He who has but a 
single  hair on his head,  let him honour  it;" i.e. keep it clean from filth. A certain  
man with dishevelled  hair and ruffled  beard  came one day before  the Messenger  
of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him".  On seeing  him, the Messenger  
of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "Has this man no 
ointment  wherewith  to hold his hair?"  Then turning  to those  present  he added,  
"One  of you enters  the place  as though  he were  a demon."
The second:  The discharge  which  collects  in the hole of the ear (i.e. the ear- 
wax). Wiping  will remove  what is evident  of it, while that which  collects  at the 
bottom  of the canal should  be carefully  cleansed  after emerging  from the bath;  
for too much  of that discharge  may be harmful  to the hearing  of the individual.
The third:  What  collects  within  the nose of the wet thick  mucus  and sdcks  to 
its (inner  walls).  It is removed  by inhaling  and exhaling.
The fourth:  The yellow  deposits  which  collect  between  the teeth and the dp 
of the tongue.  These  are removed  by the use of the toothpick  and the rinsing  of 
the mouth,  both of which  we have already  discussed.
The fifth: The filth which  adhere  to the beard  and the lice which  swarms  it 
whenever  it is not tended.  These  can be gotten  rid of by washing  and combing.  
Thus  we have it in the well-known  tradition  that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him" never  parted  with his comb,  brush,  and mirror  
whether  he was at home  or on travel.  This in fact was the established  custom  
(among)  the Arabians.  According  to a strange  tradition,  the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" was wont to comb  his beard twice a 
day. His beard  was thick  and the same  was true of that of Abu Bakr.  'Uthman,  on 
the other  hand,  had a long but thin beard;  while  Ali had a broad  and wide beard  
which  spread  out across  his chest from shoulder  to shoulder.  In yet a stranger  
tradition.  A'ishah said: "Several  people gathered  outside the gate of the 
Messenger's  house  and he went  out to meet them.  Just before  he went  out, I saw 
him gaze, into the water-vessel  and fix his hair and beard.  Thereupon,  I said to 
him: Do you do such a thing  as you the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and


Page 271:
Book  three:  the mysteries  of purification
peace  be upon  him"?'  To which  he replied:  'Yes, for Allah  loves that His servant  
should  adorn  himself  whenever  he goes out to meet his brethren'."  The ignorant  
might  think that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon  
him",  like other  men,  attended  his hair and beard  because  of his, desire  to appear  
handsome  before  people.  Such an error on the part of the ignorant  is like 
comparing  angels to blacksmiths.  On the contrary,  the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" was commanded  by AJlah to fulfill a 
commission  and among  the duties therein  he was expected  to exalt himself  
before  man and inspire  respect  in their hearts  so that they might  not belittle  and 
despise  him, and to embellish  his looks  in their sight  so that they might  not slight  
him not consequently  turn away from him, and thereby  give the hypocrites  
reason  to rejoice.  Care for personal  appearance  is obligatory  upon every  learned  
man who undertakes  to call men to the worship  of Allah.  He should  attend  to his 
outward  appearance  so that he would  leave nothing  that will alienate  men and 
turn them away from him. In this and in other  similar  things  the intention  of the 
individual  is the test. For such actions  are qualified  and coloured  by the purpose  
for which they have been done. Adornment  for this purpose  is, therefore,  
desirable;  while leaving  the beards dishevelled  and neglecting  one's personal  
appearance  in order to attract  attention  as an ascetic  is extremely  dangerous.  
Rather  to relinquish  (such affectations)  and undertake  those things  which  are 
more  important  is desirable.  In short,  these  are inward  states  between  the servant  
and his Allah.  The critical  (observer)  will not fall to see that and no amount  of 
ambiguity  and confusion  could  prevail  over him or mislead  him. Yet how many  
an ignorant  person  affects  these things  in order  to attract  the attention  of men,  
thereby  deceiving  himself  and other  people  as well, and claims  that his purpose  in 
that is good and wholesome.  Thus you often see several  learned  men wear  
expensive  and luxuriant  garments  and claim that their sole purpose  is to 
confound  heretics  and refute  dissenters,  and that their aim is to draw nigh unto  
Allah.  But the (falsity  of their claim  will be revealed  on that day when  the hearts  
are examined,  when the tombs  are laid open and their contents  are scattered,  
when the secret  thoughts  are made known.  On that day will the pure gold be 
selected  and the glittering  (brass)  thrown  away. We seek your refuge  with the 
Lord  from the shame  due the hypocrites  on the day of judgment.
The sixth: The filth which adheres  to the knuckles,  i.e. the forger  joints.  
These  the Arabians  did not wash frequently  because  they neglected  the washing  
of their hands  after meals.  Consequently,  filth collected  in these wrinkles.  The  
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" commanded  them,  
therefore  to wash  their knuckles.
The seventh:  Cleaning  the finger-tips  which the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" commanded  the Arabians  to do. 
This includes  not only the removal  of the filth that adheres  to the finger-tips  
but also that which  gathers  beneath  the nails, especially  since the nails
always trimmed,  with the result that dirt collected  in great quantities  
beneath  them. Consequently,  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and269
were
not


Page 272:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
peace  be upon  him" ordered  that the manicuring  of nails plucking  the hair off 
the arm-pits,  and shaving  the pubes  should  be done (at least) once every  forty  
days, but he commanded  that the part beneath  the nails be cleaned  regularly  
(and frequently).  In one of the incidents  in the life of the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him"  we are told that he once thought  the 
revelation  he was expecting  was unduly  late; so when finally  Gabriel  came  
down with the revelation,  the latter said: "How could we reveal to you 
(anything)  when ye wash not your knuckles  and clean not your finger-tips  
when  your teeth  are yellow  and ye clean  them  not. Command,  therefore,  your  
people  to do that,"
The eighth:  The dirt which  collects  to the body through  perspiration  and 
dust, all of which  are best removed  by taking  a bath. In this connection  (we may  
point out that) there is no harm in frequenting  the public baths, as the 
Companions  themselves  went into the baths of Damascus.  One of them even  
said: "What  a good place is the bathhouse!  Therein  the body is cleansed  and its 
heat reminds  us of Hell."  This saying  has been ascribed  to both Abu Ad-Darda'  
and Abu Ayyub-al-Ansari.  Another  said: "What  a bad place is the bathhouse!  
Therein  nakedness  is revealed  and shame  goes to the winds."  The first has 
addressed  himself  to the benefits  of the bath while the second  pointed  out its 
evils. At any rate there are certain  obligations  and rules which  the visitor  of the 
bath should  observe.  Two of these obligations  pertain  to his own nakedness  and 
two relate  to the nakedness  of others.
The two obligations  which  pertain  to his own nakedness  are first, that he 
should  shield  it from the sight of others  and second,  guard against  the touch  
of others.  No one should  undertake  to clean it but himself.  Furthermore,  he 
should  not allow the bath attendant  who rubs the backs of bathers  and 
massages  their body to touch  either  his thigh or the part of the body  which  
lies between  the navel  and the pubes.  Some  permit  the touching  of any part of 
the body  with the exception  of the genitals  but the best rule is not to permit  
the touching  of the parts already  mentioned,  since the rule which prohibits  
looking  at the private  parts has been extended  to include  the prohibition  of 
touching  them as well. The same rule covers  the other part of nakedness,  
namely,  the thigh.
The two obligations  which  relate  to the nakedness  of others  are first, to avoid  
looking  at it whenever  it is exposed  and the second  to warn  against  uncovering  it 
because  to warn  against  evil is obligatory.  The person  is expected  to warn against  
uncovering  the nakedness  but he is not held responsible  for the acceptance  of his 
warning.  He cannot  escape  the obligation  of warning  except  when  such warning  
exposes  him to physical  danger  or personal  injury,  or lead him to something  
which  in itself  is unlawful.  Then  he is not expected  to condemn  one unlawful  act 
when  such condemnation  will compel  the offender  to commit  another  unlawful  
act. To refrain  from  warning  and excuse  himself  on the ground  that his warning  
will be of no use, is quite unpardonable  because  no one will fail to take 
cognizance  of disapproval  and be influenced  by it and no one will fail to take270


Page 273:
Book  three:  the mysteries  of purification
heed when  he is derided  for his sins. It will result  in making  the matter  seem  bad 
in his sight  and will induce  him to shun  it. For this reason  it is not permissible  to 
neglect  warning.  Consequendy,  it has become  discreet  and wise not to frequent  
the public  baths nowadays,  because  they are always  full of exposed  nakedness  
parricularly  the part of the body  extending  from the navel  to the upper  part of the 
pubes,  which  part is not considered  nakedness  by people  any more,  although  the 
Law  has included  it therein,  and has made  it a sort of boundary  to nakedness.  It is 
therefore  desirable  to evacuate  the bath-house  of people  (in return  for a certain  
fee). In this connection  Bishr  Ibn Al-Harith  said: "I shall not be hard on the man  
who pays his last Dirham  in order  to have the bath-house  evacuated  of people  
when  he takes his bath."  Ibn 'Umar  was once seen in the bath-house  with his face 
turned  toward  the wall having  also blindfolded  his eyes with a bandage.  Some  
have said that there was no harm in frequenting  the bath-houses  provided  the 
individual  has two veils, one for covering  his nakedness  and the other for his 
head over  which  he should  throw  it in order  to protect  his eyes.
As to the rules,  they are ten, and they go as follows:
The first is good intention.  The individual  should  not enter the bath-house  
for the sake of some immediate  worldly  gain or for the purpose  of toying  with  
some earthly  passion.  Rather,  he should  seek therewith  healthy  cleanliness  in 
preparation  for prayer.
The second  is that he should  pay the bath-owner  his fee in- advance  before  
entering  the bath because  the service  which  (the client)  wants  is unknown  to the 
owner and similarly  is the fee which the latter expects.  Consequently,  the 
payment  of the fee in advance  before  going  into the bath removes  the ambiguity  
from at least the one and sets the mind  of the other  at ease.
The third  is that the individual  should  advance  his left foot first as he enters  
the bath and should then say, "In the name of Allah the Merciful,  the 
Compassionate.  I seek refuge  in Allah against  Satan,  the accursed  the filthy,  the 
impure,  the corrupt,  the corrupting."
The fourth  is that he should  await  the time when  the bath is vacant  and then  
go in, or see to it, by paying,  that it is vacated.  For although  there may not be in 
the bath any except  religious  men who are careful  not to expose  their nakedness,  
the very fact of seeing  their unprotected  bodies  smacks  of lack of shame  and is 
suggestive  of nakedness.  Furthermore,  it is unavoidable  in moving  about  not to 
expose  the nakedness  especially  as the flaps of the veil turn and fold. Then the 
individual  cannot  help but see the nakedness  of others.  It was for this reason  that 
Ibn 'Umar  blindfolded  his eyes (whenever  he entered  a bath house).
The fifth  is that the individual  should  wash  his hands  as he enters  the bath.
The sixth  is that he should  not rush into the tank room  until he had first been  
through  the first room  (where  men sit to perspire).
The seventh  is that he should  not use too much water but should  limit  
himself  to no more than he needs  as the occasion  demands.  To go beyond  that 
will offend  the bath-owner  especially  when the wasted  water  is hot which  costs  
money  and requires  labour.271


Page 274:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
The eighth  is that the heat of the bath-house  should  remind  the individual  of 
the heat of Hell and, having  spent one hour in the heat of the bathhouse,  he 
should  try to get an idea of (the endless  stay of sinners  in) Hell: It is the place  
most like Hell, both in the fire beneath  the water  and the darkness  above.  We 
seek refuge  in Allah  against  all such things.
As a matter  of fact, the wise will not fail to remember  the hereafter  every  
moment  of his life, because  it is his final destination  and eternal  abode.  In 
everything  he sees, whether  it be water,  or fire, or any other thing, he finds  
warning  and admonition.  For every man notices  the things most familiar  to 
himself.  Thus  if a dry-goods  man, a carpenter,  a mason,  and a weaver  entered  a 
furnished  house,  you would  find, on examination,,  that the dry-goods  man looks  
at the draperies  and scrutinizes  their  value;  the weaver  directs  his attention  to the 
clothes  and examines  their textures;  the carpenter  gazes at the ceiling and 
ponders  over its construction;  and the mason  turns to the walls and deliberates  
over the manner  of their building  and the exactness  of their lines. Similarly,  the 
traveller  on the road of the hereafter  does not see anything  without  finding  in it a 
lesson  as well as a reminder  of the hereafter.  In fact, his eyes fall on nothing  
without  receiving  from Allah a warning.  If he sees something  black he 
remembers  the darkness  of the grave;  if he sees a snake he is reminded  of the 
serpents  of Hell; if he sees any ugly face the image  of Munkar  and Nakir  as well  
as that of the tormenting  angels  appear  before  him; if he hears  a terrific  noise  his 
mind turns to the blowing  of the horn on the Last Day; if he sees something  
beautiful  he recalls  the bliss of Paradise  and if he hears  someone  say yes' or no' in 
the market-place  or in a house  he reverts  in his thoughts  to his own fate on the 
day of judgment,  whether  he will be accepted  or rejected.  How becoming  it is, 
then, that such things should prevail over the heart of the wise. Nothing  
dissuades  him therefrom  except  the most important  matters  of life. But if he 
should  compare  the length  of his stay in this life with that of his abode  in the 
hereafter,  he would  despise  the former  if he were  mindful  and wise.
The ninth  is that the individual  should  pay no salutation  on entering  the bath ­
house,  and in case he was saluted  he should  not return  the salutation.  If he 
should  feel inclined  to reply to the salutation  he may do so by saying  "May  Allah  
forgive  you your sins." He' may shake hands  with (an acquaintance  bystander)  
and, for the sake of commencing  a conversation,  say, "May Allah forgive  you 
your sins"; but this conversation  should  not be prolonged.  Furthermore,  he 
should  not repeat  the Qur'an  in the bath-house  except  in his mind,  yet there  is no 
harm in repeating  aloud the formula.  "I seek refuge  in Allah against  Satan,  the 
accursed."  Again  the practice  of going  into the bathhouse  between  the hour of 
sunset  and nightfall  is undesirable,  because  at that time the demons  roam (the 
earth).
The bather  may have someone  else to rub his back and massage  his body  
for him, as it has been related  that Yusuf  Ibn -Asbat  has, before  he died,  
requested  that a certain  stranger  be allowed  to wash his corpse  after his death  
and said: 'The man has rubbed  my back  and massaged  my body  for me when  I272


Page 275:
Book  three:  the mysteries  of purification  
was once bathing,  I wish therefore  to reward  him with something  which  will 
please  him, and I am sure it will please  him much  to wash my corpse."  The  
permissibility  of having  another  rub one's back and massage  his body is 
attested  by what  one of the Companions  related  concerning  the Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him":  Said the Companion,  "In one 
of his travels  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon  
him" stopped  at an inn. Stretching  himself  out with his belly to the earth,  a 
negro  slave began  to massage  his back for him. Therefore,  I said: "What  is 
going  on the Aposde  of Allah?"  To which  he replied,  "The she-camel  threw  
me off its back.
The tenth  is that when  the individual  is through  with his bathing  he should  
thank  Allah upon this blessing,  for it has been said that hot water  in winter  time  
is a much  sought  of luxury.  Concerning  baths  and bathing  Ibn 'Umar  said: "Baths  
are an innovated  luxury."  This describes  baths in their relation  to the Law, but 
from the view-point  of medicine  they have been  described  as a protection  against  
leprosy,  especially  after the use of a depilatory.  It has also been said that 
depilating  the pubes  once a month  cools the body,  purifies  the complexion,  and 
increases  virility.
Again  it has been said: "To urinate  while  standing  in the bath in winter  time is 
better  for the man than a dose of medicine."  And again  'To sleep  after  the bath in 
the summer  time is as good  as any dose of medicine.  "Washing  the feet with cold 
water  after the bath is a protection  against  gout.  Furthermore,  the pouring  of cold 
water  over the head, as well as drinking  it, after the bath is undesirable.  These  
rules  govern  the conduct  of men in bath houses.
As to women  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon  
him" said: "It is not lawful  unto a man to take his wife into a bath-house  when  
others  are bathing  therein."  According  to a tradition  vouched  for by more than  
two Companions,  "It is unlawful  for the man to enter the bath-house  without  a 
veil, and it is unlawful  for the woman  to enter therein  except  after childbirth  or 
when sick." A'ishah  herself  entered  the bath-house  when she was sick. Thus  
whenever  the woman  has to go into the bath - house  let her do so veiled.  It is 
undesirable  for the man to give her the fee lest it be a help for her to do that 
which  is undesirable.273
The Second  Kind:  The Bodily  Cysts
It includes  eight  things :
The first is the hair of the head in the shaving  of which  there is no harm to 
him who desires  to be clean. On the other hand there is no harm in leaving  it 
grow  provided  it is regularly  anointed  and combed,  and provided  it is not left to 
grow  in tufts as the smart  set are wont  to do, or in long locks  like the manner  of 
the descendants  of the noble blood to whom the practice  has become  a 
distinctive  sign. Unless  the person  be a descendant  of noble  blood  his wearing  of 
long  locks  would  be false and fake.
The second  is the hair of the moustache.  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's


Page 276:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "Cut your moustaches  off." According  to 
another  version,  "Shear  your  moustaches."  And according  to another,  "Trim  your  
moustaches  and spare your beard."  In other  words  let your moustaches  extend  
around  the upper  lip (but not hang  down  over it), i.e. let them  encircle  it. Of the 
same root is the phrase  "circling  round"  in the verse, "And you shall see the 
angels  circling  round  about  the throne."  In still another  version  the word  used is 
'pluck"  which  indicates  cutting  extremely  short while "trim"  indicates  a lesser  
extent.  Said Allah,  "Should  He ask them  of you and press  you, you would  show  
yourselves  niggards."  In other words "should  He urge you." Shaving  the 
moustache,  however,  was never  mentioned  in the tradition,  while trimming  so 
closely  as to resemble  shaving  has been related  about  the Companions.  Thus  
one of the followers  (, on seeing  a person  who had trimmed  his moustache  very  
closely,  said: 'You remind  me of the Companions  of the Apostle  of Allah."  AJ- 
Mughirah  Ibn Shu'bah  once said: "One day the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon him" saw me with a long moustache.  There  upon  
he said, come  hither  and have your  moustache  cut off along  a toothpick."  There  
is, however,  no harm in leaving  its extremities  (i.e. its ends) to hang down.  
'Umar  and others  besides  him did that, because  the ends of the moustache  do 
not cover  the mouth  and no food sticks  to them  while  eating.  The words  of the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him", "Spare  the 
beards,"  mean let them grow. According  to one tradition  the Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "The Jews spare their  
moustache  and trim their beards;  but ye do the opposite."  Some  learned  men  
disapproved  of shaving  and regarded  it an innovation.
The third  is the hair growth  on the armpit  the plucking  of which  is desirable  
at least once every forty days. Such an operation  is quite easy and simple  at the 
person  has been accustomed  to it right from the beginning.  But the person  who  
has been accustomed  to remove  it by shaving  may continue  to do, so especially  
since  its plucking  is tormenting  and painful  while  the sole purpose  of its removal  
is cleanliness  and the prevention  of dirt from collecting  in the interstices  of the 
hair. This purpose  is equally  attained  through  shaving.
The fourth  is the hair on the pubes,  the removal  of which  is desirable  either  
by shaving  or by the use of a depilatory.  Its removal  should  not be delayed  any 
longer  than forty  days.
The fifth are the nails,  the manicuring  of which  is desirable  especially  because  
of their horrible  appearance  and because  of the dirt which  collects  underneath  
them  when  they are long. The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon him" said: "O Abu Hurairah,  manicure  your nails for Satan sits on them  
when they are long."  The presence  of a little dirt underneath  the nails will not 
effect  the validity  of ablution,  because  such little dirt will not prevent  the water  
from penetrating  (underneath  the nails).  Furthermore  because  of necessity,  both  
the Bedouins  and die city people  are usually  lenient  in this matter,  particularly  in 
connection  with the toe-nails,  the knuckles,  and the back of the feet and the 
hands.  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" was274


Page 277:
Book  three:  the mysteries  of purification  
wont to command  (his followers)  to manicure  their nails and take them to task 
for the dirt underneath  their nails. But he did not command  them to repeat  their  
prayer.  If he had done  so his commandment  would  have had the added  benefit  of 
admonishment  and warning  against  impurity.
As far as the way of manicuring  the nails is concerned,  I have not seen any 
genuine  tradition.  But I have heard  that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon  him",  when  manicuring  his nails,  began  with the index  finger  
of the right hand and finished  with the thumb.  (Starting  with the index  finger  of 
the right hand,  he worked  to the little finger  of the same hand).  Moving  then to 
the left hand he worked  from the little finger to the thumb.  (Last of all he 
manicured  the thumb  of the right hand).  Pondering  over this, one of its aspects,  
which seems to prove its veracity,  occurred  to me. Now such things do not 
become  apparent  except  through  the light of prophecy.  But learned  men of 
insight  aim at deducing  through  reasoning  the significance  of these things  when  
reported  to them. What occurred  to me, although  Allah knows  best, is that 
manicuring  the nails of the fingers  and toes is, to begin with necessary.  But 
whereas  the hand is superior  to the foot, a person  should  begin  with the fingers.  
Of the two hands,  the right is the superior  and consequendy  should  come first.  
Of the five fingers  of the right  hand the index  finger,  which  points  out (at people)  
when  one is repeating  the two words  of the Skahcidah , is the superior.  Therefore,  
it should  mark the beginning.  Since  the order  favoured  by the Law in matters  of 
ablution  and the like is to begin  with the right  and proceed  in the same  direction,  
the finger  to the right of the index  should  come  next. If the hand is placed  with 
its back to the ground  then the thumb  would  be the finger  to the right of th« 
index.  If it is placed  with its palm to the ground  then the middle  finger  would  be 
to the right of the index.  But if you let the hand dangle  naturally,  its palm would  
be inclined  towards  the ground  because  the right hand swings  from the right to 
the left, and as the swinging  motion  is completed  the back of the hand goes up. 
Hence  the natural  position  is the more preferable.  Furthermore,  if one palm is 
placed  against  the other  the fingers  form,  as it were,  a circle,  and consequently  the 
person  should  commence  with the index  finger  of the right hand and from there  
work to the right until he returns  to the same index finger.  This will result in 
working  from the index finger  of the right to the little finger  of the same hand,  
and then from the little finger  of the left hand to the thumb  of the same hand.  
There  remains  the thumb  of the right hand,  with which  the operation  should  be 
concluded.
As to the toes, since  no tradition  governing  the procedure  of manicuring  them  
has come down  to us, I hold it to be better  to being  with little toe of the right  
foot and, working  to the right, end with the little toe of the left foot, which  is 
exactly like procedure  followed  in cleaning  between  the toes. For the 
considerations  which  we have mentioned  in connection  with the hands  do not 
hold here since there is no "fore-finger,"  (that points  out at people  when one 
repeats  the two words  of the Shahadah)  in the foot. In fact, all the toes are in the 
same category  and form a single  line close to the ground.  Therefore,  one begins275


Page 278:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
with the right. Nevertheless  any such assumption  of their forming,  as it were, a 
circle  when  the sole of the one foot is placed  against  that of the other,  unlike  the 
same thing in the case of the fingers,  is unnatural.  These minute  details of 
procedure  become  instantly  apparent  through  the light of prophecy,  but in our 
case they are extremely  difficult.
If we were asked concerning  the order of procedure  (which  should be 
followed  in manicuring  the nails)  we might  be able to give a satisfactory  reply;  but 
if we cite the practice  of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon him" and the procedure  which he followed  therein,  we might be able  
thereby  to ascertain  its rule. His reminder  (to us through  his practice)  of the 
significance  (of his procedure  therein)  calls for the deduction  of that significance.  
No one should  think  that the actions  of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  
and peace be upon him", and all their details,  have not been governed  by a 
definite  standard,  and a fixed rule and order.  In fact in all the voluntary  actions  
which  we have already  mentioned  man follows  one of two or more procedures,  
the selection  of which  is motivated  not by sheer agreement  but by a definite  
reason  which demands  that procedure  be followed  and preferred.  For the 
haphazard  way of doing things  just as they come is characteristic  of animals;  
while governing  actions  and movements  by the standard  of their (relative)  
significance  is peculiar  of the saints  of Allah.  The more  regulated  and governed  
are the actions  and movements  of man, and the less they are haphazard  and 
neglected  and the farther  removed  they are from (caprice),  the nearest  would  his 
rank be to that of the Messengers  and saints  and the closer  would  his position  be 
to Allah. This is because  he who is close to the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him" is close  to Allah.  Furthermore,  he who is close  
to Allah is, in the nature  of the case, one of His nearest  devotees,  and he who  
stands  close to the favourite  is in turn a favourite.  We, therefore,  seek refuge  in 
Allah  against  having  the direction  of our actions  and movements  in the hands  of 
Satan,  ruled  and governed  by him through  (our) passions  and whims.
The way in which  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" applied-kohl  to his eyes has been accepted  as the norm  and standard  for 
such procedures.  He was wont  to apply  it thrice  to the right and twice  to the left 
eye beginning  with the right for its superiority.  The disparity  between  the number  
of applications  to each eye is for the sake of having  the sum total odd in number,  
because  odd numbers  are superior  to even numbers.  Allah  himself  is unique  and 
prefers odd (numbers).  Consequently,  the actions of man should always  
correspond  to one of the attributes  of Allah. For this reason  the use of an odd 
number  of stones  in abstersion  has been viewed  with favour.  The number  of the 
applications  of kohl to the eyes has not been  limited  to three,  although  there  is an 
odd number,  because  the share of the left eye would  then be one application  
only, which  thing  in insufficient  and will not ordinarily  extend  over all the roofs  
of the eyelashes.  The right eye has been assigned  three applications  because  
preference  is necessary  to produce  an uneven  number,  and since the right eye is 
superior  it enjoys  that preference.276


Page 279:
Book  three:  the mysteries  of purification
If you should  say, "Why  was the left eye limited  to two applications?"  my 
answer  would  be that the limitation  was dictated  by necessity,  since if each eye 
were given an odd number  of applications  the sum total of the applications  
would  be even,  because  the sum of two odd numbers  is an even number.  But the 
preference  if for an odd number  in the total applications  of both eyes rather  than  
of each eye. There  is, however,  another  possibility  in the applications  of kohl,  
namely  to follow  the practice  in ablution  and apply the kohl thrice  to each eye. 
This procedure  is the more preferable.  If I were to investigate  all the details  
which  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" observed  
in his actions  and movements,  it will take me a long time to exhaust  the subject.  
Therefore,  base your future  in your past experience;  and know  that no learned  
man will ever become  the heir of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon him" unless  he acquaints  himself  with all the statutes  of the Law,  
so that nothing  will separate  them (i.e. learned  man, and Prophet)  from each  
other except  one rank that of prophecy  which is the distinguishing  degree  
between  the inheritor  and the inherited.  For the inherited  is he who has earned  
and collected  the money  while the inheritor  is he who has neither  earned  nor 
collected  is but received  it by transmission.  These  and other  significations,  despite  
their relative  easiness  when  compared  with the profound  mysteries  and secrets,  
are not independently  comprehended  except  by the Messengers  and are not 
elicited  through  transmission,  after their (importance)  has been pointed  out by 
the Messengers,  except  by their  heirs,  the learned  men.
The sixth and seventh  are the umbilical  cord and the foreskin  
respectively.  The umbilical  cord is cut off at the time of birth while  
purification  through  circumcision  is performed  by the Jews on the seventh  
day after birth; consequently,  contradicting  them by delaying  the operation  
until the child cuts his front teeth is more desirable  and less dangerous.  The 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's blessing  and peace be upon him" said 
"Circumcision  is a law unto man and a meritorious  deed on the part of 
women.'  Nevertheless,  excess  should  be avoided  in female  circumcision.  The  
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" once said to 
umm Atiyyah'  who used to practise  the circumcision  of women:  "O Umm  
Atiyyah!  Be moderate  when you perform  the operation  of circumcision  on 
women  and cut off only a small  portion  of the prepuce  of the clitoris,  for that 
is better  fitted to preserve  femininity  and more welcome  to masculinity."  In 
other  words  it does not impair  the woman's  passion  nor rob the man of his 
pleasure  at the time of intercourse.  Consider  the refined diction and 
euphemism  of the Messenger's  speech  and how the light of prophecy  has 
shone from the affairs  of the hereafter  which  are the noblest  concerns  of 
prophecy  and illuminated  the affairs  of this world do that matters  of great  
importance,  the ignorance  of which  may result  in grave,  consequences,  have  
been revealed  to the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon277


Page 280:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
him" despite  the fact that he was unlettered.  Praise,  therefore,  be to Allah  who  
has sent His Aposde  to be a mercy  unto men and through  him to make  
available  for them  the blessings  of this world  and of the world  to come.
The eighth  is the long beard  and we deferred  discussing  it in order  to attach  
to it certain  rules  which  govern  it and several  innovations  practised  in connecdon  
with it, since  this is the most  suitable  place  for the treatment.
People  have differed  as to the length  of the beard.  Some  held that there  is no 
harm  in the person  taking  his beard  with his hand and cutting  off what  is beyond  
his grip. This was done by Ibn Umar  and many of the followers  and met the 
approval  of Ash-Sha'bi  and Ibn Sirin but was frowned  at by Al-Hassan  and 
Qatadah  who said that letting  it alone  is a better  practice,  which  conforms  to the 
words  of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him",  
"Spare  your beards."  The right practice  is not difficult  to determine,  provided  it 
does not lead to trimming  the beard and rounding  it off the sides; for its 
excessive  length renders  the appearance  unseemly  and releases  the tongues  of 
backbiters  with ridicule.  Consequently,  it is better  to guard  against  such practice.  
Al-Nakh'i  said: "I wonder  why a sane man whose  beard  is long does not trim it, 
thereby  avoiding  its being  too long and its being too short, for moderation  is 
desirable  and good in everything."  For this reason  it has been said: "The bigger  
the beard the smaller  the mind."  There  are, in connection  with the beard,  ten 
disapproved  practices.  Of these some are more reprehensible  than the others.  
These  are dyeing  the beard  black,  bleaching  it with sulfur,  plucking  it, plucking  
the gray hairs in it, (elaborately)  trimming  it augmenting  its size, neglecting  it, 
dishevelled  and untidy  for the sake of affecting  asceticism,  boasting  of its black  
colour  as indicative  of youth  and of its gray colour  as the sign of (venerable)  age, 
and dyeing  it red or yellow,  thereby  emulating  the righteous  but lacking  (their  
good)  intention.
The first (undesirable  practice))  in connection  with the beard is dyeing  it 
black.  The practice  is forbidden  as die Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon him" said concerning  it, "The best of your youth  are those  who  
emulate  the old among  you, and the worst of your old men are those who  
emulate  the youthful  among  you." Emulating  the old refers  to the emulation  of 
their poise and dignity  not their gray hair. Not only was the dyeing  of the hair 
black forbidden  but it was also described  as the sign of the people  of Hell, and 
according  to another  version  it was identified  with the sign of the unbelievers.  A 
certain  man who was living  at the time of Umar  and was wont  to dye his beard  
black  got married.  Soon  afterwards  the dye faded  and his gray hair was no longer  
concealed.  Thereupon  the relatives  of his wife brought  him before  the Caliph  
who annulled  his marriage  and had him flogged,  and said to him, "You  deceived  
them by concealing  from them your gray hair." It is said that the first to dye his 
beard  black  was Pharaoh,  may the curse of Allah be upon him. It is also related  
on the authority  of Ibn Abbas  that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and278
i


Page 281:
Book  three:  the mysteries  of purification
peace  be upon him" said: "At the end of time there will be men who will dye 
their beards black like the crop of the pigeon;  the same will not enjoy the 
fragrance  of the Garden."
The second  is dyeing  the beard  yellow  or red. The practice  is permissible  in 
order  to conceal  the age of warriors  from the unbelievers  in times of raids and 
Jihad,  if it is not for this purpose  but rather  for the sake of emulating  men of 
religion,  then it is blameworthy.  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" said: "Yellow  is the colour  with which  the Muslims  dye their  
beards,  and red is that with which  the believers  dye theirs."  Henna  was used for 
red dye while  saffron  for the yellow.
Some  of the learned  men dyed their beards  black  before  setting  out on raids.  
There  is no harm in this practice  provided  the intention  is genuine  and is not 
shadowed  by passion  or lust.
The third is bleaching  the beard with sulfur to give the appearance  of an 
advanced  age for the purpose  of gaining  deference  and veneradon  having  their  
tesdmony  accepted  at court and their narradon  of tradidons  on the authority  of 
the masters  accredited;  they do it out of their desire  to lord it over youth  and in 
order to appear  very learned,  thinking  that age would  make them superior.  But 
how far from the truth this is; for age does not increase  the ignorance  except  with  
ignorance.  Knowledge  is the fruit of reason  which is a nadve talent removed  
from the influence  of age and not affected  by gray hair. But he who is born  
foolish  increases  in folly with the years. Furthermore,  the masters  were wont to 
give precedence  to the learned  youths.  Thus 'Umar  used to give Ibn 'Abbas,  
despite  his youth,  precedence  over the leading  Companions,  and used to seek his 
counsel  rather  than theirs. Ibn 'Abbas  himself  said: "Allah  gives not His servants  
knowledge  except  in their youth  and in youth  lies all that is good."  In support  of 
his assertion  he quoted  the statement  of Allah:  "They  said: 'We heard  a youth  make  
mention  of them  whom  they call Abraham.'"  (Al-Anbiya  60)
{ ($) ^  iJ6 »
He also quoted  the statement  of Allah Almighty:  "They  were youths  who had 
believed  in their  Lord,  and in guidance  had We increased  them"  (Al-Kahf  13)
i 0 J&Zjj  }
And: "And  We bestowed  on him wisdom  while  yet a child."  (Maryam  12)279
i 0 <4^3  }
Anas was wont to say, "The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon  him" died having  in his head and beard  no more  than twenty  gray hairs."  
On being  told, "But Abu Hamzah!  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" was well advanced  in age when  he died,"  Anas  replied,  "Yes.  
But Allah did not disgrace  him with gray hair?" "Is it a disgrace  to have gray  
hair?"  they asked.  Anas  replied,  "Do you not all dislike  gray hair? ”


Page 282:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
It is also said that Yahya  Ibn Aktham  was appointed  judge when he was 
twenty-one  years  old. While  sitting  in his court  one day a certain  man,  wishing  to 
deride  him for his young  years,  asked  him, "Of  what  age is the judge,  may Allah  
repair  him!".  Ibn Aktham  said: "Of the same age as Attab Ibn Adi when the 
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" entrusted  him with  
the governorship  of Mecca  and its judgeship,"  and with this retort  silenced  him.  
It was also reported  on the authority  of Malik  that he said: "I read in one of the 
books  the following  statement,  "Let not a man's  beard deceive  you for the bull 
has one also!'".
Abu Amr  Ibn Al-'Ala  said: "Whenever  you see that a man is tall in stature  but 
his head is small and beard  long and wide be sure that he is a fool although  he 
may be Umayyah  Ibn 'Abd-Shams."  Ayyub  Al-Sikhtiani  said: "I have seen old 
men of eighty years follow  a youth in order to learn from him." Ali-Ibn  Al- 
Hussain  said: "He who has preceded  you in knowledge  is your Imam in this 
respect  though  he may be younger  than you in years."  Abu-'Amr  Ibn Al-'Ala  was 
once asked,  is it becoming  to the old man to learn from youth?"  He answered  
saying,  "Ignorance  abases,  man and knowledge  ennobles  him."  Yahya  Ibn Ma'in,  
on seeing  Ahmad  Ibn Hanbal  walking  behind  a mule ridden  by Al-Shafi'i  told 
him "O Abu Abdullah,  I see that you have discontinued  the company  of Sufyan,  
despite  his advanced  age, for the company  of this youth  in order  to learn from  
him."  Ahmad  replied,  "If you only knew (what  is good)  you would  have walked  
behind  his mule from the other side. If, because  of his death, I should  miss  
receiving  the knowledge  of Sufyan  from him personally,  I could  get it at anytime  
through  other transmitters.  But if I should  miss the company  of this youth I 
would  never receive  any of his learning  either direcdy  from him or indirecdy  
through  transmitters."
The fourth  is plucking  the gray hairs of the beard  because  of one's loathing  
for gray hair. The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him"  
has definitely  forbade  the plucking  of gray hair and said that it was the light  of the 
believer.  It is of the same nature  as dyeing  the hair black  and the reasons  of its 
being  disapproved  have already  been mentioned.  Gray hair is the light of Allah  
and he who dislikes  it dislikes  the light.
The fifth is plucking  the beard in whole  or in part for fun or play. This is 
disapproved-it  renders  the appearance  unseemly.  Similarly,  plucking  the hair off 
either  side of his lower  lips is an innovation.  A certain  man who was wont to 
pluck  the hair off the side of the lower  lip took the witness  stand before  Umar  
Ibn Abd-al-Aziz  but (the caliph)  rejected  his testimony.  Likewise,  Umar  Ibn Al- 
Khattab  and Ibn Abu Laila, the judge of Al-Medina  refused  to accept the 
testimony  of any person  whose  practice  it was to pluck  his beard.
Plucking  the beard during  its early growth  in order to appear  beardless  is 
among  the major  evils. For the beard  is the ornament  of man. Furthermore,  there  
are among  the angels  of Allah  some  who swear  saying,  "By Him who has adorned280


Page 283:
Book  three:  the mysteries  of purification
mankind  with beards."  It is one of the signs of perfect  creation  and distinguishes  
men from women.  According  to an odd interpretation  it is the beard which  is 
meant  by the statement  of Allah  Almighty:  "He adds to His creatures  what He 
wills"  (Fatir  1)281
40 ^ <3^  4 ~^y ^
The followers  of Al-Ahnaf  Ibn Qais remonstrated  saying,  "We wish we could  
purchase  for Al-Ahnaf  a beard  though  it may cost us twenty  thousand."  Shuraih  
Al-Qadi  said: "I wish I had a beard  though  it were for ten thousand."  For how  
could  the beard be disliked  when  it gives the man honour,  identifies  him in the 
sight of others  with learning,  induces  them to look up to him with respect,  gives  
him the exalted  seat in the assemblies  (of the learned),  focuses  the eyes of all 
upon him, entitles  him to precedence  over his associates,  and shields  him from  
dishonour,  since he who curses  is restrained  from it if the man has a beard?  It is 
said that all the inhabitants  of Paradise  are beardless  except  Aaron,  the brother  of 
Moses,  who has a beard  which  reaches  down  to his navel.  It has been given  him 
as a special  favour  and distinction.
The sixth is trimming  the beard in successive  contours  for the sake of 
attracting  women.  Said Ka'b,  "There  will be at the end of time men who will trim  
their beards  in the shape  of the dove-tail,  and will have the toes of their shoes  
upturned  like a scythe.  Such  people  have no manners."
The seventh  is lengthening  the beard  by allowing  the hair which  covers  the 
temples,  which  belongs  to the head, to grow  and join that of the said whiskers  
thereby  going  beyond  the limits  of the ordinary  beard  and reaching  halfway  down  
the cheeks.  This is contrary  to the habit  becoming  the righteous.
The eighth  is combing  the beard for the sake of attracting  the attention  of 
men. Bishr said concerning  beards,  "There  are two sins in connection  with  
beards:  combing  them for the sake of (attracting  the attention  of) men and 
neglecting  them  dishevelled  to appear  before  them  ascetic.
The ninth  and tenth are to admire  the beard's  blackness  and its grayness.  
Such self admiration  is blameworthy  with regard  to all the members  of the body  
as well as traits  and actions,  as it will be discussed  later.
This is what we have intended  to discuss  of the various  kind of adornment  
and cleanliness.
Three  traditions  pertaining  to the rules which  govern  the body  provide  us with  
twelve  items of which  five pertain  to the head, namely  parting  the hair, rinsing  
the mouth,  inhaling  and exhaling  water (for cleaning  the nose), trimming  the 
moustache,  and using the toothpick;  three pertain to the hands, namely  
manicuring  the nails,  washing  the knuckles,  and cleaning  the finger-tips;  and four  
pertain  to the body,  namely  plucking  the hair of the arm-pits,  shaving  the pubes,  
circumcision,  and abstersion  with water-all  of which  have been mentioned  in 
tradition.  Now whereas  the purpose  of this book is to discuss  outward  and


Page 284:
282 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
physical  cleanliness  rather than the inward  we shall confine  ourselves  to the 
former.  Let it, however,  be known  that the inward  filth and dirt from  which  it is 
necessary  to clean  one self are innumerable  and we shall take them  up in detail  in 
the Quarter  on The Destructives  and shall also discuss  the way of their removal  
and the method  of purifying  the heart  from  them.v.
I
I


Page 285:
— .—yaii3-(ITrr. r _
Praise  be to Allah  Who has caused  His Kindness  to overspread  His servants,  
and filled their hearts  with the light of faith,  which  descends  from  the Throne  of 
Majesty  to the nearest  heaven,  in the form of many  degrees  of mercy,  one of His 
emotions.  He, besides  being  Unique  of Majesty  and Magnificence,  differs  from  
the kings  by exhorting  His creatures  to ask and invoke  Him (whatever,  wherever  
and whenever  they like) when He says (on the tongue  of His Messenger  in his 
relating  from Him): "Is there any to invoke  Me so that I should  answer  his 
invocation?  Is there  any to ask for My Forgiveness,  so that I should  forgive  him?"
He also is distinguished  from the magistrates  by his opening  the gate (of 
mercy)  and removing  the veil when  He allowed  for His servants  to talk privately  
with Him during  their prayers,  whether  in congregation  or in solitude,  whenever  
and wherever  their states  change.  Furthermore,  he did not confine  His allowance  
to such concession,  but rather  he kindly  exhorted  and summoned  (His servants  
so much  repeatedly  to invoke  Him),  even though  the kings  who are very  weak  (in 
comparison  with Him) give no concession  of meeting  and talking  to them alone  
except after offering  gifts and bribes: Glory be to Him! How Great and 
Magnificent  His State  is! How  Strong  is His Power!  How  Perfect  is His Kindness!  
How  Comprehensive  is His Beneficence!
Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  Muhammad,  His well-chosen  Prophet  and 
selected  devotee  as well as upon  his family  and holy companions,  the main keys  
to guidance,  and the lights  of (dissipating)  darkness.  To go further:
Verily,  prayer  is the supporting  fundament  of religion,  which  safeguards  one's  
certainty  of faith,  as well as it is the beginning  and the commencement  of the acts 
and deeds of worship  and religious  service  which  leads to obedience  (of Allah  
Almighty).  In the art of jurisprudence,  whether  the expanded,  the middle  or the 
brief,  we've  surveyed  its primal  roots and branches,  addressing  our main concern  
to its unusual  hairsplitting  and peculiar  events,  in order  that this might  serve  as a 
treasure  for a verdict  giver  therefrom  to take his legal and religious  verdicts,  and a 
weapon  to which  he should  take resort  and refer  (whenever  he needs  to do so).
In this book,  we are going  to restrict  our concern  to explain  what  is necessary  
for the seeker  (of worship),  to learn of its outward  deeds  and inward  mysteries,  
and uncover  from  the subdeties  of its obscure  concepts  what  corresponds  to the 
meanings  of submission,  sincerity,  and good intention,  something  which is 
uncustomary  to be mentioned  by the ordinary  books  of jurisprudence.  This book  
will be composed  to imply  seven  chapters  which  go as follows:
Chapter  one: on the merits  of prayer
Chapter  two: on the excellence  of the outward  deeds  and acts of prayer  
Chapter  three:  on the excellence  of its inward  deeds  and acts 
Chapter  four: on imamate  and Emulation  
Chapter  five: on the Friday  prayer  and its etiquette
283


Page 286:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
Chapter  six: on different  problems  of general  significance,  which  the seeker  is 
in need  to learn  and know
Chapter  seven:  on the related  voluntary  deeds.284
CHAPTER  ONE:  ON THE MERITS  OF PRAYER
Prostration,  congregational  prayer,  the call to prayer  (Adhan)  and other  related
topics
(It is narrated  by At-Tirmidhi  on the authority  of Ibn Umar that the 
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him")  said: "Three  (types  
of persons)  will (be made  to stand)  on a sand hill of black musk  on the Day of 
Judgement,  who will not be frightened  by reckoning  nor will they be harmed  by 
fear, until the cases of the people  will be decided:  a man who used to recite  the 
Holy Qur'an,  seeking  only the Countenance  of Allah Almighty,  and to lead a 
people  on their own accord;  a man who used to pronounce  the Call to prayer  
(Adhan)  in a mosque,  and invoke  Allah  just for the sake of the Countenance  of 
Allah  Almighty;  and a man who was examined  by a large sustenance  in his world,  
even  though  this did not divert  him from  doing  the deeds  of the hereafter."
(It is narrated  on the authority  of Abu Sa'id that the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him") said: "No man nor jinn nor anything  
hears  the voice  of the Caller  to prayer  (Mu'adhdhin)  but that he will bear witness  
in his favour  on the Day of Judgement."  (It is narrated  on the authority  of At- 
Tabarani  on the authority  of Anas that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon him") said: "Allah's  Hand  be on the head of the Mu'adhdhin  
until  he finishes  from  his Call to prayer."
In comment  on Allah's  statement:  "And  who is better  in speech  than he, who  
invokes  Allah  and does righteousness"  (Fussilat  33)
{ jj 1 Cr*3 }
It is said: "It was revealed  in connection  with the Mu'adhdhins."  (It is 
unanimously  narrated  on the authority  of Abu Sa'id that the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him") said: "When  you hear the Adhan,  
repeat  the same words  of the Mu'adhdhin."  However,  this is commendable  (for 
everyone  to repeat  the same wording  of the Adhan)  with the exception  of the 
statements  "Come  to prayer,  come to prosperity",  in which one should  say: 
"There  is neither  might  nor power  but with Allah",  and in the statement  "The  
prayer  has been established":  "Might  Allah establish  it and make  it permanently  
regular  as long as both the heavens  and the earth abide"  and in the statement:  
"The  prayer  is much  better  than sleep":  "You've  told the truth,  proved  lawful  and 
sincere  in advise",  and when  the Mu'adhdhin  finishes,  let him say: "O Allah,  Lord  
of this perfect  call and established  prayer! Give Muhammad  the access (to 
intercession)  and superiority  (over  others),  and the high supreme  rank, and raise  
him to the praiseworthy  station  which  You have promised  him: You never  break  
Your  Promise."
According  to Sa'id Ibn Al-Musayyab:  "He, who offers  prayer  in a desert,  an 
angel prays on his right hand, and an angel on his left hand; and when he


Page 287:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
pronounces  the Call to prayer,  and also the prayer  establishment  (Iqamah),  angels  
(whose  number  is as huge  and great)  as mountains  pray  behind  him."
The Excellence  Of The Obligatory  Written  Prayers
Allah Almighty  says in this connection:  "set up regular  prayers:  for such  
prayers  are enjoined  on Believers  at stated  times."  (An-Nisa  103)
A l ^^jlyaJl o! ^
(It is narrated  by Abu Dawud,  Ibn Majah  and An-Nasa'i  on the authority  of 
Ubadah  Ibn As-Samit  that the Messenger  of Allah  “Adlah ’s blessing  and peace  
be upon him") said: “There are five (obligatory)  prayers  which Allah has 
enjoined  upon  His servants  to be offered  every  day and night:  whoever  offers  
them in full, and decreases  nothing  from them out of dealing  with them  
slighdy,  on the Day of Judgment,  Allah  will make  a pledge  for him to admit  
him to the Garden;  and whoever  offers them (defectively)  and decreases  
anything  from them  out of dealing  slightly  with them,  he will have no pledge  
with Allah:  He could  punish  him if He so likes, and He could forgive  him if 
He so likes. ”
(It is narrated  by Muslim  on the authority  of Jabir  that The Messenger  of Allah  
“Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him”) said: “The example  of the (daily  
obligatory)  five prayers  is like an overflowing  river,  running  at the door  of anyone  
of you in which  he washes  himself  five times a day: which  filth do you see will 
remain  on his body?"  they answered:  "No filth will remain  on his body).  On that 
he said: "Similarly,  the five (obligatory)  prayers  removes  sins in the same  way as 
the water  removes  filth."
(It is narrated  by Muslim  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that The  
Messenger  of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him”) said: "The  (five  
obligatory  written)  prayers  act as expiations  for (such  of sins as are committed  
in) the intervals  between  them as long as the major  sins are avoided."  (It is 
narrated  by Malik on the authority  of Sa'id Ibn Al-Musayyab  that The  
Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him”) said: "What  
distinguishes  us from the hypocrites  is the attendance  of both Isha' and 
Morning  (prayers  in congregation),  for both are too hard upon them (to 
attend)."  (It is narrated  by At-Tabarani  on the authority  of Anas that The  
Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him”) said: "If one 
meets Allah (on the Day of Judgement)  having  wasted  his prayers,  Allah  
Almighty  will not care of (and thus give him no reward  for) any of his good  
deeds."
(It is narrated  by Al-Baihaqi  on the authority  of Umar  that The Messenger  of 
Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him ’^ said: "Prayer  is the support  pillar  
of faith, and he who leaves  it has indeed  destroyed  his faith."  (It is unanimously  
narrated  on the authority  of Ibn Mas'ud  that The Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s 
blessing  and peace  be upon  him")  was asked:  "Which  deed is the best (and most  
rewardable  in the Sight of Allah)?"  he said: "It is (to establish  and perform)285


Page 288:
286 The quarter  of the acts of worship
prayers  just at their stated  prescribed  times."  (It is narrated  by Ahmad  and Ibn 
Hibban  on the authority  of Abdullah  Ibn Amr that The Messenger  of Allah  
“Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him”) said: "He, who strictly  guards  the five 
(obligatory)  prayers,  by making  perfect  its ablution,  and performing  them just at 
their stated  prescribed  times,  they will come  to be a light  and proof  (for his faith)  
on the Day of Judgement;  and he, who wastes  them will be mustered  in the 
company  of (such  evil infidels  as) Pharaoh  and Haman."
(It is narrated  by Abu Dawud  on the authority  of Jabir  that The Messenger  of 
Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him”) said: "The prayer  is the key to 
the Garden."  It is narrated  on the authority  of At-Tabarani  on the authority  of 
Jabir and Al-Hakim  on the authority  of Ibn Umar  that The Messenger  of Allah  
“Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him”) said: "No duty enjoined  by Allah  
Almighty  upon His servants  after (the obligation  of having  faith in the) Allah's  
Oneness  is much  dearer  to Him than prayer;  and had there  been anything  dearer  
to Him than it, surely,  His angels  would  have worshipped  Him through  it: but 
even (they are in continual  prayer  with) some  of them bowing,  others  falling  in 
prostration,  others  standing,  and others  sitting."
(It is narrated  by Al-Bazzar  on the authority  of Abu Ad-Darda'  that The  
Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him”) said: "He, who  
leaves  even a single (obligatory  written)  prayer  intentionally  has (been  about  to) 
become  an infidel."  This means  he has become  closer  to be deprived  of faith,  by 
having  his handhold  loosened  and his supporting  probe  fall down,  just like what  
is said about  him who approaches  a town  that he has reached  and entered  it. (It is 
narrated  by Ahmad  on the authority  of Umm  Ayman  that The Messenger  of 
Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him”) said: "He, who leaves  even a 
single  (obligatory)  prayer  intentionally  has, indeed,  come  out of the covenant  of 
Muhammad  "Peace  be upon  him"."
According  to Abu Hurairah:  "He, who performs  ablution  perfectly  and then  
comes  out aiming  direct  at offering  prayer  (in congregation  in the mosque)  is still 
in prayer  as long as he is aiming  at offering  it, and a good  deed  is written  for him 
by each step of one of his (foot),  and an evil deed  is plotted  out of him by each  
step of the other  (foot);  and when  anyone  of you hears the Iqamah,  let not him 
delay  (to come),  for he who receives  the greatest  reward  among  you is him whose  
house is the farthest  (from the mosque)."  They asked: "Why is that O Abu  
Hurairah?"  he said: "In view of the great  number  of steps (he takes towards  the 
mosque)."
It is narrated  (on the authority  of Abu Sa'id and Abu Hurairah)  that the first 
deed of a servant  to be regarded  on the Day of  Judgement  will be the prayer:  if it 
is found  to be full and perfect,  it will be accepted,  and so will all of his deeds,  and 
if it is found  to be defective,  it will be rejected,  and so will all of his deeds."  
(According  to unknown  narration  the Prophet  said to Abu Hurairah):  "O Abu  
Hurairah!  Tell your family  to offer prayer  (regularly  and perfectly),  perchance  
Allah will endow  you with sustenance  from sources  which  you expect  not."  
According  to a learned  man: "The example  of a praying  man is like the example


Page 289:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
of a merchant,  to whom  no profit  could  be accounted  until all of his capital  is 
fulfilled  to him; and so is the case of the praying  man, from whom no 
supererogatory  prayer  will be accepted  unless  he fulfills  what is obligatory  upon  
him." Abu Bakr "Allah  be pleased  with him" used to say: "When  the prayer  is 
due, stand  to your fire which  you have kindled,  and extinguish  it."
The Excellence  Of Perfecting  Its Pillars
(It is narrated  on the authority  of Ibn Al-Mubarak  on the authority  of Al- 
Hassan,  and Al-Baihaqi  on the authority  of Ibn Abbas  that the Prophet)  said:  
"The example  of the obligatory  written  prayer  is like the example  of the balance:  
whoever  gives  due measure  (as far as its pillars  are concerned  has the right  to) ask 
for full measure  (of its reward)."  (It is further  narrated  by Ibn Al-Mubarak  on the 
authority  of) Yazid Ar-Raqashi  that he said: "The prayer  of The Messenger  of 
Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him” was proportionate  (in the length  
and perfection  of its pillars)  as if it were  balanced."  (It is narrated  on the authority  
of Ibn Al-Muhabbar  on the authority  of Abu Ayyub Al-Ansari  that The  
Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him”) said: "Verily,  it 
happens  that two of my nation  should  stand to offer prayer,  with their bowings  
and prostrations  the same (in length  and posture),  even though  their prayers  are 
as far from each other  as the heaven  from the earth"  and he pointed  out to the 
submission  (of the heart)."  (It is narrated  by Ahmad  on the authority  of Abu  
Hurairah  that The Messenger  of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him")  
said: "On the Day of Judgement,  Allah  will never  look at any servant  who does  
not set up his vertebra  (in the standing  posture)  between  his bowing  and 
prostration  during  the prayer."  (It is narrated  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  
that The Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him”) said:  
"Should  such of you as turns his face during  the prayer  not fear that Allah  
Almighty  might  change  his face into that of a donkey?"
(It is narrated  on the authority  of At-Tabarani  on the authority  of Anas  and 
Al-Baihaqi  on the authority  of Ubadah  Ibn As-Samit  that The Messenger  of 
Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him”) said: "He, who offers a 
prayer just at its stated prescribed  time, in which he performs  ablution  
perfectly,  offers its related  bowings  and prostrations  perfectly,  and proves  
fully submissive,  it then will ascend  (to the heaven)  as white  and joyful,  saying:  
"Might  Allah  guard  you as much  as you have  guarded  me";  and he, who offers  
a prayer  but not at its due time, in which he does not perform  ablution  
perfectly,  nor does he offer its related  bowings  and prostrations  in full, nor 
does he prove submissive,  it then will ascend  (to the heaven)  as black and 
dark, saying:  "Might  Allah ruin you as much as you have spoiled  me." It 
remains  in such state until  when  it is wherever  Allah  Almighty  wills it to be, it 
will be folded  in the same  way as a shabby  dress  is folded,  therewith  his face  
will be beaten."
(It is narrated  on the authority  of both  Ahmad  and Al-Hakim  on the authority  
of Abu Qatadah  that The Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be287


Page 290:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
upon him”) said: "The worst  among  thieves  is he, who steals from his prayer."  
According  to Ibn Mas'ud  and Salman  "Allah  be pleased  with them":  "The  prayer  
is like the measure:  whoever  gives a full measure  (has the right to) ask for full 
measure  (of reward);  and he, who deals with fraud,  knows  what  Allah  Almighty  
says about  those  who deal with fraud."
The Excellence  Of Offering  Prayer  In Congregation
(It is unanimously  narrated  on the authority  of Ibn Umar  that The Messenger  
of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him”) said: "The (reward  received  
by him who offers)  prayer  in congregation  is twenty-seven  degrees  superior  to 
that (received  by him who offers)  prayer  alone."  (It is narrated  by Al-Bukhari  and 
others  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that Allah's  Aposde  "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon  him")  said: "By he in Whose  Hand  my soul is! I was about  to 
order  for collecting  firewood  and then order  Someone  to pronounce  the Adhan  
for the prayer  and another  to lead the prayer.  Then  I would  go from  behind  and 
burn the houses  of men who did not present  themselves  for the (compulsory  
congregational)  prayer.  By he, in Whose  Hands  my soul is! If anyone  of them  had 
known  that he would  get a bone  covered  with good  meat  or two (small)  pieces  of 
meat  present  in between  two ribs, he would  have turned  up for the Isha prayer. ”
(It is narrated  by Muslim  on the authority  of) Uthman  "Allah  be pleased  with  
him" that he said, tracing  it up to the Prophet:  "He, who attends  Isha' prayer  (in 
the mosque  in congregation)  is (to receive  a reward)  like him who stands  (for 
supererogatory  prayers)  half a night;  and he, who attends  Morning  prayer  is (to 
receive  a reward)  like him who stands (for supererogatory  prayers)  a whole  
night."  (According  to an unidentified  narration)  he (Sa'id Ibn Al-Musayyab)  said:  
"He, who attends  even a single  (obligatory)  prayer  in congregation  has, indeed,  
worshipped  (Allah)  so much from the whole  of his breast."  According  to Sa'id  
Ibn Al-Musayyab:  "No Mu'adhdhin  pronounced  the Call to prayer  since twenty  
years  but that I have been  in the mosque  (in expectation  for the prayer  to attend  
it in congregation)."
According  to Muhammad  Ibn Wasi': "I have no desire  but for three things  
from all of this world:  a brother  to set me right whenever  I become  crooked,  a 
random  amount  of sustenance  with no subsequent  burden  (to bear),  and a prayer  
to offer  in congregation,  free from forgetfulness,  with its excellence  (of reward)  
written  for me." It is narrated  that once Abu Ubaidah  Ibn Al-Jarrah  led a people  
in prayer,  and when he finished  he said: "Satan has kept (whispering  evil 
suggestions  into my mind) until it was made alluring  to me to see that I have  
superiority  to others:  I will never  lead prayer  once  again."
According  to Al-Hassan:  "Pray  not behind  a man who do not address  himself  
to the gatherings  of the learned  men."  According  to An-Nakh'i:  "The parable  of 
him who leads people  in prayer  with no knowledge  is like the parable  of him who  
measures  the water in the sea, without  knowing  how to distinguish  its 
augmentation  from its reduction."  According  to Hatim  Al-Asamm:  "Once,  I 
missed  (an obligatory)  prayer  in congregation  in the mosque,  thereupon  Abu288
l


Page 291:
Book  four: The mysteries  and duties  of prayer
Ishaq  Al-Bukhari  consoled  me; even though  if a son of mine  died,  as many  as ten 
thousand  would  console  me; and that's because  the calamity  of religion  is easier,  
in the sight  of the people,  than that of the world."  According  to Ibn Abbas:  "He,  
who hears the Call to prayer  and he does not respond  (by going  to attend  the 
prayer  in the mosque),  and thus he intends  no good,  no good  will be intended  for 
him." According  to Abu Hurairah:  "It is much better  for mankind  to have his 
ears filled with melted  lead than to hear the Call to prayer  and give no response  
to it (by going  to attend  the prayer  in the mosque)."
It is narrated  that once Maimun  Ibn Muhran  went to the mosque  (to offer  
prayer  in congregation)  thereupon  it was said to him: "The people  turned  away  
(after they had finished  from the prayer)."  On that he said: "We all belong  to 
Allah, to Whom we return! The excellent  reward of this (obligatory  
congregational)  prayer  is much  dearer  to me than the governorship  of Iraq."
(It is narrated  by At-Tirmidhi  on the authority  of Anas that the Prophet)  said:  
"He, who offers (obligatory)  prayers  in the mosque  (in congregation),  for forty  
days,  during  which  no single  Takbir  of assuming  prayer  skips  him, Allah  Almighty  
writes  for him two clearances:  one from  hypocrisy  and the other  from the fire of 
Hell."  It is said that when  it will be on the Day of  Judgement,  some  people  will be 
mustered,  with their faces (as shining  as) a brilliant  star, whom  the angels  will ask: 
"What  were your deeds (in the world)?"  they will say: "Whenever  we heard the 
Call to prayer,  we would  soon stand  to perform  ablution  and nothing  will divert  
our attention  from it." Another  sect will be mustered,  with their faces (as 
glittering)  as the moons,  and they will say in reply  to the same  question:  "We used  
to perform  ablution  before  the due time (of every obligatory  prayer)."  Another  
group  will be mustered,  with their faces (as bright)  as the sun, and they will say: 
"We used to hear the Call to prayer  while  being  in the mosque."  It is narrated  that 
the righteous  predecessors  used to console  themselves  for three days whenever  
they missed  the Takbir  of the first (rak'ah),  and for seven days whenever  they  
missed  a congregational  prayer.289
The Excellence  Of Prostration
(It is narrated  by Ibn Al-Mubarak  on the authority  of Damrah  Ibn Habib  that)  
the Messenger  of Allah  said: "The servant  never  draws  near unto Allah  Almighty  
with anything  more  excellent  than prostration  which  he performs  in solitude."  (It 
is narrated  by Ibn Majah  on the authority  of Ubadah  Ibn As-Samit  that) the 
Messenger  of Allah said: "There  is no Muslim  who performs  even a single  
prostration  to Allah  Almighty  (in the prayer)  but that therewith  Allah  Almighty  
raises  him a degree  higher,  and removes  a sin from  his account"  It is narrated  (by 
Muslim  on the authority  of Rabie'ah  Ibn Ka'b Al-Aslami)  that a man said to the 
Messenger  of Allah: "Invoke  Allah to make one of the deserts of your  
intercession,  and confer  upon me the blessing  of your companionship  in the 
Garden."  On that he said to him: "Then, address  yourself  to performing  
prostrations  (in prayer)  so much."
It is said (according  to the narration  of Muslim  on the authority  of Abu


Page 292:
290 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
Hurairah)  that a servant  becomes  the closest  to Allah  Almighty  when  he is in the 
posture  of prostration;  and this is the significance  of Allah's  statement:  "But  
prostrate  yourself  in adoration,  and bring  yourself  the closer  (to Allah)!"  (Al-Alaq
19)
He further  says: "On their faces are their marks,  (being)  the traces of their  
prostration."  (Al-Fat-h  29)
It is said that this refers  to such of earth  as sticks  to their  foreheads  because  of 
prostration;  and it is also said, and it is more right, that it refers  to the light of 
submission,  which  shines  from  the inward  and is reflected  upon  the outward;  and 
it is said that this refers  to the spots of light which  they will have on their faces  
on the Day of  Judgement,  resulting  from  the traces  of ablution.
(It is narrated  by Muslim  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that) the 
Messenger  of Allah  said: "When  a son of Adam  recites  (the Surah  of) As-Sajdah  
and falls in prostration,  Satan  moves  aside  and goes on weeping  and saying:  "Woe  
to me! This (mankind)  was commanded  to fall in prostration  (to Allah)  and he 
did accordingly,  thereupon  the Garden  is assured  to him; and I was commanded  
to fall in prostration  (to Allah)  and I disobeyed,  thereupon  the fire (of Hell) is 
assured  to me."
It is narrated  that Ali Ibn Abdullah  Ibn Abbas  used to perform  nearly  one 
thousand  prostration  everyday,  and it is for this that he was called the Ever - 
Performer  of prostration.  It is narrated  that Umar  Ibn Abd Al-Aziz  used not to 
prostrate  but on the earth. It is further  narrated  that Yusuf  Ibn Asbat  said: "O 
assembly  of young  men! Hasten  to (offer  as much  bowings  and prostrations  as 
you can) during  the time of your health  before  the disease  (hinders  you), for 
indeed,  there remains  none whom I might envy but he who performs  his 
bowings  and prostrations  perfecdy,  from  which  I have been obstructed  (because  
of my illness)."  Sa'id Ibn Jubair  said: "I never  grieve  for leaving  anything  in this 
world  other  than prostration."
According  to Uqbah  Ibn Muslim:  "There  is no quality  in a servant  much  
dearer  to Allah  Almighty  than that of a man who loves to meet  Allah  Almighty;  
and there is no moment,  during  which  the servant  is the closest  to (the Presence  
of) Allah  Almighty  than that in which  he is falling  in prostration."  According  to 
Abu Hurairah:  "The servant  becomes  the closest  to (the Presence  of) Allah  
Almighty  when  he is falling  in prostration:  so, invoke  (Allah)  so much  while  being  
in such  posture."
The Excellence  Of Submission
Allah Almighty  says: "And establish  regular prayers for celebrating  My 
Praises."  (Ta Ha 14)
i (0) Is ojiidT^


Page 293:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  ------------
He further  says: "Be not of the heedless."  (Al-A'raf  205)291
i © V3 $
He says too: "Approach  not the prayer  with your minds  befogged  until you 
understand  what  you say." (An-Nisa  43)
^2^ 0£ C tejS\j  o^i^jT  \y'j2u V ^
IIt is said that mind's  being  befogged  refers  here to the severe  anxiety,  or to the 
love of this world  according  to another  opinion.  But according  to Wahb:  it is the 
exoteric  meaning  of the word which  is intended  here, since it highlights  the 
intoxication  under  whose  effect  one might  fall in this world,  showing  the reason  
by His statement  "Until  you understand  what  you say".
Many are the praying  men who do not drink wine even though  they  
understand  not what they say in their prayer.  (It is narrated  in both Sahihs  on 
the authority  of Uthman  that) the Messenger  of Allah  said: "He, who offers  a 
two-rak'ah  prayer,  during  which he does not think of anything  of (the 
pleasures  and delights  of) this world,  all of his earlier  sins will be forgiven  for 
him."  (It is narrated  by At-Tirmidhi  and An-Nasa'i  on the authority  of Al-Fadl  
Ibn Abbas  that) the Messenger  of AJlah said: "Verily,  the prayer  is (to show)  
meekness,  submissiveness,  humility,  imploration,  moaning,  drinking  in the 
company  (of Allah Almighty),  and placing  one's hand (with their inside  
towards  the sky) while  invoking:  "O Allah!  O Allah!"  and whoever  does not 
do so, his (prayer)  will be defective."
According  to some  previous  Scriptures,  it is related  from  Allah  Almighty  that 
eh said: "I accept  not the prayer  of everyone,  but rather  I accept  only the prayer  
of him who humbles  himself  before  My Greatness  and Magnificence,  behaves  
not arrogantly  towards  My servants,  and feeds the hungry  poor just for the Sake  
of My Countenance."  (It is narrated  by both  Abu Dawud  and At-Tirmidhi  on the 
authority  of A'ishah  that the Messenger  of AJlah) said: "Verily,  the prayer  has 
been enjoined,  performing  Hajj and circumambulation  has been  imposed  and the 
rituals  have been made  ceremonial  just for the celebration  of the Praises  of Allah  
AJmighty."  For this reason,  if there is no feeling  of greatness  and reverence  
towards  the celebrated  One, that is the ultimate  and intended  goal, what  is then  
the significance  do your  celebrations  have?
(It is narrated  by Ibn Majah  on the authority  of Abu Ayyub,  and Al-Hakim  on 
the authority  of Sa'd Ibn Abu Waqqas  that the Messenger  of Allah)  said to him 
whom  he was giving  advice:  "And  when  you offer  prayer,  let it be the prayer  of 
him who is going  to leave (this world  immediately)"  i.e. he should  leave himself,  
leave his desires  and passions,  leave his life, and rather going to meet his 
Protector,  just as Allah  AJmighty  says, in confirmation  to that: " O man! Verily  
you are ever toiling  on towards  your Lord,  painfully  toiling,  but you shall meet  
Him."  (Al-Inshiqaq  6)
s-iii


Page 294:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
He further  says: "So fear Allah;  for it is Allah  that teaches  you. And Allah  is 
well acquainted  with all things."  (Al-Baqarah  282)
i ©5 ^'3 (^=^4*^3  l**5'3 }
He says too: "And fear Allah, and know that ye are to meet Him (in the 
Hereafter),  and give (these)  good  tidings  to those  who believe."  (Al-Baqarah  223)292
(It is narrated  on the authority  of Al-Hassan,  Ibn Abbas  and Ibn Mas'ud  
that the Prophet)  said: "He, whose  prayer  does not forbid  him from  doing  what  
is shameful  and wrong,  will not become  but farther  from (the Presence  of) 
Allah  Almighty."  Therefore,  since  prayer  is a private  conversation  (and dialogue  
between  one and his Lord):  how should  it be in the presence  of heedlessness?  
According  to Bakr Ibn Abdullah:  "O mankind!  If you like to enter into your  
protector  and master  with no leave nor interpreter  you might  do so." It was 
said: "How  should  this be?" he said: "If you perform  your ablution  perfectly,  
and enter  your  praying  place  (and assume  prayer),  you will have entered  into the 
Presence  of your Protector  and Master  with no leave,  and talked  to Him with  
no interpreter."
According  to A'ishah  "Allah  be pleased  with her": "The  Messenger  of Allah  
"Peace  be upon  him" used to speak  with us as well as we with him, and once  
the prayer  is due he would  (cease  to talk to us and) seem as if he was not 
familiar  with us as well as we were not with him."  This is because  of his being  
occupied  by the Greatness  and Magnificence  of Allah  Almighty.  (According  to 
an unidentified  narration  the Prophet)  said: "Allah  Almighty  never  accepts  a 
prayer (from anyone)  in which one does not bring his heart (in willing  
submission)  together  with his body." It is reported  that whenever  (the 
Prophet)  Abraham,  Allah's Blossom  Friend stood to offer prayer, the 
groaning  of his heart would  be heard from a two-mile  distance.  Whenever  
Sa'id At-Tanukhi  went on his prayer,  the tears would  not cease to flow from  
his cheeks  on his beard.
(It is narrated  by At-Tirmidhi  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that) once the 
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" saw a man playing  with his beard  
(during  his prayer),  thereupon  he said: "Had the heart of that man been  
submissive,  surely,  his organs  would  subsequently  have become  submissive."  It is 
narrated  that once Al-Hassan  saw a man playing  with the pebbles  (in his prayer)  
and saying:  "O Allah! Help me get married  to the beautiful  women  of lustrious  
eyes (in the Garden)!"  on that he said: "How  bad betrother  are you! Do you ask 
to marry  the beautiful  women  of big lustrious  eyes while  you are playing  with the 
pebbles?"
It was said to Khalaf  Ibn Ayyub:  "do the flies not harm you during  your  
prayer,  with the result  that you are forced  to drive them away from you?"  he 
said: "I never  habituate  myself  to do anything  to corrupt  my prayer."  He was 
asked:  "Then,  how do you keep patient  on that?"  he said: "I was informed  that


Page 295:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
the wicked  ones persevere  under  the whips  of the magistrates  in order  to be 
said about  them:  "So and so is patient"  and of course,  they are proud  of that."  
Therefore,  since I'm standing  before  my Lord: should  I move for a (little  
thing  as trivial  as a) fly?"
It is narrated  from Muslim  Ibn Yasar  that whenever  he intended  to pray, he 
would  say to his family:  "You might  continue  speaking  if you so like, for I will 
not hear you (as I will be wholeheartedly  engaged  in my prayer)."  It is narrated  
from him that once he was offering  prayer  in the mosque  of Basrah  when  one of 
its sides collapsed,  to which  the people  gathered,  while  he made  no sense  to that 
undl he finished  from  his prayer  and turned  away.  It is narrated  from  Ali Ibn Abu  
Talib "Allah  be pleased  with him" that whenever  the time of prayer  was due, he 
would  be shaken  and the colour  of his face would  change.  He was asked:  "What  
is wrong  with you O Commander  of Believers?"  he said: "Now  it is time for the 
trust which  Allah  Almighty  offered  to the heavens,  the earth and the mountains  
to bear, but they felt afraid  of it, and rejected  to bear it, even though  I (as one of 
mankind)  have carried  it."
It is narrated  from  Ali Ibn Al-Hussain  that whenever  he performed  ablution,  
his face would  turn yellow.  His family  asked  him: "What  is that which  afflicts  
you whenever  you perform  ablution?"  he said: "Do you know  before  Whom  
I'm going to stand?"  it is narrated  on the authority  of Ibn Abbas  "Allah  be 
pleased  with both" that (the Prophet)  David  said in his dialogue:  "O my God!  
Which  (of Your)  servants  does inhabit  Your  House?  And from whom  do you 
accept  prayer?"  Allah  Almighty  revealed  to him that "O David!  The one who  
inhabits  My House,  from Whom  I accept  prayer  is he, who humbles  himself  
before  My Greatness  and Magnificence,  spends  his day on celebrating  My 
Praises,  and refrains  from desires  just for My Sake;  who feeds the poor hungry,  
gives shelter  to the alien, and has mercy  towards  the stricken  person:  it is he, 
whose  light shines  in the sky as clear and bright  as the sun: if he invokes  Me, I 
will respond  to his invocation,  and if he asks Me, I shall  give him. I provide  him 
with padence  whenever  he falls victim  of ignorance,  and remind  him whenever  
he is given to heedlessness,  and give him light in the midst  of darkness.  His 
parable  among  the people  is like the parable  of Paradise  at the highest  position  
of the Gardens,  whose rivers never get exhausted,  and whose fruits never  
change."
It is narrated  from Hatim  Al-Asamm  that he was asked  about  his prayer  and 
he said: "When  it is time for prayer,  I perform  ablution  perfectly,  and go to the 
very place where  I intend  to pray, and sit down  until all of my organs  will be 
brought  together  (in willing  submission).  Then,  I stand to offer prayer,  making  
the Ka'bah  in front of my forehead,  the bridge  underneath  my feet, the Garden  
on my right  and the fire (of Hell) on my left, and the angel  of death  on my back,  
thinking  it to be the last prayer  (I will offer in this world).  Then,  I stand in the 
hope and fear, and glorify  Allah with an evident  Takbir  (of assuming  prayer),  
recite the Qur'an  in a quivering  tone, bow myself  humbly,  fall in prostration  
submissively,  then sit on my left hip and spread  the back of the left foot, set up293


Page 296:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
the right foot on the biggest  toe, and observe  sincerity  in all of that; but even,  I 
do not know  whether  it will or will not be accepted  from  me."
According  to Ibn Abbas  "Allah  be pleased  with him": "A brief two-rak'ah  
prayer  one offers  proportionately  with thoughtfulness  is better  than standing  for 
a whole  night  (to offer  supererogatory  prayers)  with the heart  heedless."
The Excellence  Of Mosques  And Places  Of Worship
Allah  Almighty  says: "The  mosques  of Allah  shall be visited  and maintained  by 
those  who believe  in Allah  and the Last Day."  (At-Tawbah  18)
(It is narrated  by Ibn Majah  on the authority  of Jabir that the Messenger  of 
Allah)  said: "He, who constructs  a mosque  even (as small in area) as a pigeon's  
nest just for the Sake of Allah,  Allah will construct  for him a palace  in the 
Garden."  (It is narrated  by At-Tabarani  on the authority  of Abu Sa'id that the 
Messenger  of Allah)  said: "He, who familiarizes  himself  with (visiting)  mosques  
(regularly)  Allah  Almighty  adheres  to him in love."  (It is unanimously  narrated  on 
the authority  of Abu Qatadah  that the Messenger  of Allah)  said: "Let him who  
enters  the mosque  offer  a two-rak'ah  prayer  before  he sits down."
(It is narrated  by Ad-Daraqatni  on the authority  of both Jabir and Abu  
Hurairah  and Al-Hakim  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that the Messenger  
of Allah)  said: "There  is no prayer  (to be accepted  from)  him who lives within  
the vicinity  of the mosque  unless  it is offered  in the mosque."  (It is narrated  on 
the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that the Messenger  of Allah)  said: "The angels  
keep asking  for Allah's  Prayer  upon such of you as is still in the same praying  
place in which  he offers  prayer,  saying:  "O Allah!  Send Your Blessings  upon  
him! O Allah!  Forgive  him! O Allah!  Bestow  mercy  upon him!" as long as he 
does not break  his ablution  or come  out of the mosque."  (It is narrated  by Ibn 
Hibban  on the authority  of Ibn Mas'ud  and Al-Hakim  on the authority  of Anas  
that the Messenger  of Allah)  said: "Towards  the end of time,  some  of my nation  
will appear  whose  habit  will be to go to the mosques  and sit in the form  of ring-  
shaped  gatherings,  celebrating  the (vanities  of) this world  and how they love it. 
Sit not with them,  for Allah  is not in need of their celebration."
(It is narrated  by Abu Na'im  on the authority  of Abu Sa'id that the Messenger  
of Allah) said: Allah  Almighty  said in one of His Scriptures:  "The mosques  are 
My Houses  on earth, and their inhabiters  are My visitors:  blessed  be a servant  
who gets purified  and performs  ablution  in his house  and comes  to visit Me in 
My House:  it is incumbent  upon  the Host  to deal generously  with His visitor."  (It 
is narrated  by At-Tirmidhi,  Ibn Majah  and Al-Hakim  on the authority  of Abu  
Sa'id that the Messenger  of Allah) said: "If you see a man having  addressed  
himself  to visiting  the mosque  regularly,  you should  bear witness  that he is a 
faithful  believer."  According  to Sa'id Ibn Al-Musayyab:  "When  one is sitting  in 
the mosque,  he, in fact, is sitting  in the Presence  of his Lord, and thus it is 
incumbent  upon  him to say but what  is good."294


Page 297:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer
It is related  (according  to an unidentified  narration):  "The talk in the mosque  
devours  the good  deeds  in the same  way as the animals  eat the grass."  According  
to An-Nakh'i:  "It has been thought  that walking  in the dark night towards  the 
mosque  assures  the Garden."  According  to Anas Ibn Malik:  "He,  who lights  up a 
lamp in the mosque,  the angels  and the Throne  carriers  keep asking  for Allah's  
Forgiveness  for him as long as its light is still in the mosque."  According  to Ali 
"Might  Allah  honour  him":  "When  a servant  dies, his praying  place  on earth,  and 
the ascender  which  raises up his deeds  in the heaven  weep on him." He recited  
Allah's  saying:  " And neither  heaven  nor earth shed a tear over them: nor were  
they given  a respite  (again)."  (Ad-Dukhan  29)
4 -(Ipif-\ ^ o-SC lli ^295
According  to Ibn Abbas:  "The  earth  weeps  on such for forty  mornings."
According  to Ata' Al-Khurasani:  "No servant performs  even a single  
prostration  on a certain  spot of the land but that it will bear  witness  in his favour  
on the Day of Judgement,  and weep on him on the day he dies." According  to 
Anas Ibn Malik: "There  is no spot of the land on which Allah Almighty  is 
remembered,  whether  through  offering  prayer  or celebrating  His Praises  but that 
it shows  pride  over such of areas as surrounding  it, and receives  the glad tidings  
with the celebration  of the Praises  of Allah  Almighty  to its farthest  point  in the 
seventh  earth; and no servant  stands to offer prayer but that the land get 
embellished  for him. It is said that no descending  place on earth in which a 
people  alight  but that such descending  place  comes  to invoke  for Allah's  Blessing  
upon  them  (in case they offer  prayer  in it) or for Allah's  Curse  upon  them  (in case  
they  do not offer  prayer  in it)."
CHAPTER  TWO ;0N THE OUTWARD  ACTS  OF PRAYER  BEGINNING  
FROM  TAKBIR  AND  WHAT  IS PRIOR  TO IT
Once  a praying  man finishes  from performing  his ablution,  and purifying  his 
body,  the place (in which  he will pray) and garment  from filth, and covering  his 
privates  from the knee to the umbilicus,  he should  stand erect and turn his face 
towards  the direction  of the Qiblah,  making  a space between  his feet, without  
joining  them, for this was considered  a good sign for the man's religious  
knowledge.  Furthermore,  it is forbidden  to bind both feet together  as if they were  
in fetters,  as well as to lift one of both legs. In relation  to the first case, Allah  
Almighty  says: "And  you will see the Sinners  that day bound  together  in fetters."  
(Abraham  49)
As for the other,  He Almighty  says: " Behold,  there  were brought  before  him,  
at eventide,  coursers  of the highest  breeding,  and swift  of foot."  (Sad 38)
4 'Jej* ^
This is what should  be observed  as far as his legs are concerned  on standing.


Page 298:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
He should  also be eager  to set up his knees  and the part of his body  where  the 
belt is tied up. As for his head,  he could  leave it upright  at the same level of his 
standing  if he so likes,  or get it down  if he so likes,  even though  the latter  is closer  
to submission  and more  ready  to make one lower  his gaze. Let him restrict  his 
sight only to the praying  place on which  he is offering  prayer.  But if he has no 
praying  place,  let him come  close to the wall, or draw a line, since this shortens  
the range  of sight,  and refrains  one from  the distraction  of mind.  Let him further  
restrain  his sight from  surpassing  the limits  of the praying  place  or the line which  
he has drawn.  As such let him keep standing  until  it is time for bowing:  this is the 
etiquette  of standing  (in prayer).
When  he is upright  in his standing,  facing  (the Qiblah)  and lowering  his head,  
let him then  recite  "Say: 'I seek refuge  with the Lord  of Mankind. .
For this safeguards  him from the devil. Then,  let him pronounce  the prayer  
establishment  (Iqamah).  But in case he expects  that anyone  will pray behind  him,  
let him first pronounce  the Call to prayer  (Adhan)  and have the intention  (to 
offer prayer),  i.e. to intend  to offer Zhuhr  prayer,  for example,  saying  with his 
heart:  "I've  intended  to offer  the obligation  of Zhuhr  prayer  for the Sake of Allah  
Almighty",  distinguishing  it thereby  from his statement:  "I've intended  to 
compensate  the prayer  ", and the obligatory  from  the supererogatory,  and Zhuhr  
prayer  from Asr prayer,  and so on. Let the concepts  of those words  be fully  
present  in his heart,  since  with which  the intention  is held,  and the words  are but 
reminders  and causes  of its presence.
Let him firmly  endeavour  to keep on such a state until the end of Takhir ; in 
order  not to loose  submissiveness.  Once  all of that is current  in his heart,  let him 
raise his hands  up to the level of his shoulders  after letting  them  loose  in such a 
way as to make his palms alongside  his shoulders,  his thumbs  alongside  his 
earlobes,  and his fingertips  the tips of his ears, in order  to agree  with the different  
narrations  which  have come down  in this respect.  Let him turn both his palms  
and thumbs  to the direction  of the Qiblah,  spreading  the fingers  in such a way as 
not to withdraw  them nor make  artificial  spaces  between  them,  nor join them  so 
much  as to stick to each other:  he should  let them  free as they are by nature,  since  
the narrations  which  have come  down  refer to both spreading  and withdrawing;  
and such a state as in which  one should  make his fingers  lies between  both  
extremes,  which  is more fitting.  Once  both hands  are rested  in their very place,  
one should start Takhir ; letting them loose afterwards,  in the presence  of 
intention.
Let him then place both his hands  on the area between  his umbilicus  and 
breast,  putting  the right on the left, out of honouring  the former  by being  
carried  by the other, spreading  both his index and middle  fingers  along  the 
forearm,  and gripping  his left elbow  with the help of his thumb,  little finger  
and ring finger.  However,  the various  narrations  which  have come  down  to us 
make  it permissible  to utter  Takbir  with different  states  such as raising,  resting296


Page 299:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
or even letting  loose  the hands,  and there  is no harm  in doing  any of that. But 
even,  letting  loose the hands  is thought  to be more  proper,  since  it acts as the 
word  of contract,  and placing  one hand  over the other  acts as its form.  Thus  it 
starts  with letting  loose the hands,  and ends with placing  one over the other,  
in the same  way as the word of Takbir  'Allahu  Akbar  (Allah  is Greater)'  starts  
with (the Arabic  letter) Alif and ends with Ra'. For this reason,  it is more  
convenient  to make the act compatible  to the contract.  Therefore,  raising  
both hands  is regarded  as preliminary  to this commencement.
On the other  hand,  whilst  uttering  Takbir, ; one should  not raise his hands  very  
high in such a way as to bring them forward  towards  his front, nor should  he 
bring them backward  behind  his shoulders,  and on finishing  from Takbir ; he 
should  not move them rightward  nor leftward:  on the contrary,  he should  let 
them fall freely and gendy,  placing  his right hand on his left. According  to a 
certain  narration  whenever  he (the Prophet)  uttered  Takbir  (of assuming  the 
prayer)  he would  let his hands  fall freely,  and whenever  he intended  to recite,  he 
would  place his right hand over his left. If this is right, it is more fitting  to be 
adopted  than  what  we've  mentioned.
As to the way of the pronunciation  of Takbir , it should  be uttered  articulately  
with each letter  pronounced  clearly  and distinctively:  he should  gently  stress the 
accent  ,f which  is attached  to the letter at the end of the word "2*1", without  
making  it a long vowel  or inserting  the letter in between  both 'j&Sr**  in the 
word  * I'. Moreover,  let him stop at the Ra of Takbir.  This is the way of uttering
Takbir  and what  relates  to it.297
The Recitation
Let one start with the invocation  of inauguration;  and in order  to agree  with  
die different  narrations  which  have come  down  in this respect,  it is better  for him 
to say after "Allah  is Greater":  "Allah  is Greater  as grand  as it should  be; praise  be 
to Allah as much as it should  be; and glory be to Allah every morning  and 
evening:  I have, firmly  and truly, set my face to Him Who has created  both the 
heavens  and the earth...and  I'm from these who bow their will (to Allah in 
Islam).  "Then,  let him say: "Glory  be to You O Allah,  with Whose  Praises  (I 
Exalt  You):  Blessed  be Your  Name,  and Exalted  be Your  Glory,  and Hallowed  
be Your  Praises:  there is no god (to be worshipped)  but You. But in case he is 
praying  behind  the imam,  let him reduce  that if the imam's  interval  is not long  
enough  for him to recite  all the invocation.
Then,  let him recite: "I seek refuge  with Allah from (the evil of) Satan,  the 
despised."  Then,  let him recite  the Opening  of the Book,  beginning  with "In the 
Name  of Allah,  Most Gracious,  Most Merciful"  with observation  of uttering  all 
of its stresses  and letters  in full articulation,  doing his best to differentiate  in 
pronunciation  between  the letters '^&After  finishing  from it, let him 
conclude  with "Amen",  which  he should  prolong,  and not join with "nor those  
who go astray"  (i.e. he should  make  a short  interval  between  both).
On the other hand, let him recite aloud in the Morning,  Maghrib  and Isha'


Page 300:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
prayers,  unless he is praying  behind  an imam (for in this case the imam's  
recitation  suffices  him), but he should  utter "Amen"  aloud.  After that, let him 
recite  a short  Surah  or as much  as what  is equal  to no less than three  Holy  Verses  
and more,  joining  not the end of the Surah  (which  he is reciting)  with Takbir.  but 
let him rather  make  an interval  between  them,  as short  as is sufficient  for him to 
say: "Glory  be to Allah".  Let him recite  from the Mufassal  the long Surahs  in the 
Morning  Prayer,  short  Surahs  in the Maghrib  prayer,  and in Zhuhr,  Asr and Isha'  
such Surah  as Al-Buruj,  and the like of it. In the Morning  prayer  on journey,  let 
him recite  such Surahs  as "Say: O you who reject  faith"  and "Say: He is Allah,  the 
One and Only";  and the same applies  to both rak'ahs  of Fajr, circumambuladon  
and salutation  (of the mosque).  In all of that, he should  keep standing,  and 
placing  both  his hands  in the way we've  described  earlier  in the first section  of the 
chapter.298
The bowing  and its appurtenances
After  that, he should  perform  bowing,  with the observation  of the following:  
first, let him utter Takbir  for bowing,  whilst raising  his hands just with the 
utterance  of Takbir,  which he should  prolong  until he comes  to the bowing  
posture.  Then, let him place both his palms on his knees during bowing,  
spreading  his fingers  along  his legs towards  the direction  of the Qiblah.  Let him 
also set up his knees,  and not fold them,  and straighten  his back,  making  both his 
neck  and head at the same  straightness  of his back,  just as if it were one side,  with  
his head not higher  nor lower.  The male should  keep his forearms  far from his 
sides as much  as he could,  but the female  should  join hers to her sides.  Then,  let 
him say: "Exalted  be my Lord, Most Great"  at least thrice, and an optional  
addition  up to seven  or even ten times  is better  unless  he is not an imam.
Then,  let him rise up from  bowing  posture  to the standing  posture,  raising  his 
hands  and saying:  "Allah  hears  such as praises  Him."  After  he feels at ease in that 
position  of standing  erect, let him say: "O our Lord! To You be the praise,  as 
much  as to fill the heavens,  fill the earth,  and such of things  as You like beyond  
that."  But let not him prolong  such standing  unless  it is in the prayers  of Tasbih  
(Exaltation),  Eclipse,  as well as the Morning  prayer,  in which  he should  practice  
Qunut  in the second  rak'ah  just before  falling  in prostration  with the help of the 
famous  related  statements.
Then, let him fall down in prostration,  whilst uttering  Takbir ; placing  his 
knees,  forehead,  nose and palms  on the ground,  making  his Takbir  synchronous  
with his falling  down.  He should  not raise both his hand except  on bowing.  Let 
his knees  be the first part of his body  to fall down  the touch  the ground,  followed  
by his palms,  and then his face, on the condition  that both his forehead  and nose  
should  touch  the ground.  Let the male further  keep his arms aloof  from his side 
as possible  as it could be, make a space between  his legs and knees,  lift the 
abdomen  up to a level higher  than both thighs,  even though  the female  should  do 
the opposite  of all of that. Then,  let him place both his hands  on the ground  at 
the same level of his shoulders,  making  no spaces  between  his fingers,  which  he


Page 301:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
should  join together,  with the thumb.  But in case he does not join his thumb  to 
them,  there  is no harm.  However,  it is forbidden  for him to spread  his arms flat 
on the ground  in the same  way as a dog does. Then,  let him say: Exalted  be my 
Lord,  Most  High"  thrice,  and an opdonal  addition  will be better  unless  he is an 
imam.299
Then, let him rise up from prostradon  to the sitdng  posture,  in which he 
should  feel at ease and sit erect:  let him first raise his head whilst  uttering  Takhir  
and sit reclining  against  his left leg, setting  up his right foot, placing  his hands  on 
his thighs,  spreading  his fingers,  without  endeavouring  to join or make a space  
between  them.  While  being  in that posture  as such,  let him say: "O Lord!  Forgive  
me, bestow  mercy upon me, provide  me with sustenance,  guide me (to the 
straight  path),  relieve  me and give me health  and power  and pardon  me." Let not 
him prolong  this sitdng  barring  in the prostradon  of (the prayer  of) Tasbih.  Then,  
let him perform  the second  prostradon  in the same way, from which  he should  
rise and gently  sit erect for a short  period  to take rest at the conclusion  of every  
rak'ah  after  which  there  is no Testification  (Tashahhud).
Then,  let him stand up, placing  his hand on the ground,  moving  not forward  
any of his legs apart from the other  whilst  raising.  Furthermore,  let him prolong  
the utterance  of Takhir  so much  as to cover  the period  from the middle  part of 
his raising  from sitting  to the middle  part of his raising  until he arrives  at the 
posture  of standing,  in such a way as to make of synchronous  to his being  
erect in sitting,  the of' to his reclining  against  his hand to stand up, and 
the ' j of the same  word to the middle  part of his raising  to arrive  at the standing  
posture,  so that the Takhir  lies just in the middle  of his moving  from the posture  
of sitting  to that of standing,  leaving  only both ends void of it; and this is much  
closer  to what  is common.  Then,  let him offer  the second  rak'ah  in the same  way 
(as he has prayed  the first),  repeating  the statement  of seeking  refuge  (with Allah  
from  Satan)  with which  he commenced  the prayer.
The Testification  (Tashahhud)
After  finishing  from the second  rak'ah,  let him recite  the first testification  
(Tashahhud),  and invoke  for Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon the Messenger  
of Allah "Peace  be upon him" as well as upon his family,  placing  his right  
hand  upon  his right  thigh,  and withdrawing  all of his fingers  barring  the index,  
and there  is no harm  to let loose  the thumb.  It is just at his uttering  the phrase  
"but Allah"  and not "there  is no god" that he should  beckon  with the index  
finger  of his right hand (in indication  to monotheism).  Whilst  uttering  this 
Tashahhud,  he should  sit on his left leg in the same  way as he does in between  
both prostrations.
As for the last testification,  after invoking  Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon  
the Prophet  "Peace be upon him", let one recite the well-known  related  
invocation.  However,  the way of reciting  the last testification  is the same as that 
of the first, with the exception  that in it he should  sit on his left hip, for he is not 
prompted  to stand  as is the case in the first: on the contrary,  he sits firm. So, let


Page 302:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
him lie his left leg outside  from underneath  his body, and set up his right leg, 
placing  the top of the big tow towards  the direction  of the Qiblah,  unless  it is 
difficult  for him to do so.
Then,  let him say: "Peace,  and Allah's  Mercy  be upon  you",  turning  rightward  
so much  as to make his right cheek  visible  from behind  his right side, and then  
turn leftward  in the same way, with another  end salutation,  having  the intention  
to come  out of the prayer.  By turning  rightward  and paying  salutation  for the first 
time, he intends  the angels  and the faithful  believers  and Muslims,  and by his 
turning  leftward  and paying  salutation  for the second  time he intends  die same.  
Furthermore,  let him utter the salutation  swiftly  and not slowly,  for this is out of 
the right way of sunnah.  This is the way an individual  prays alone,  in which  he 
should  raise his voice  with Takbirs , even though  as high enough  as to be able to 
hear himself.
On the other hand, the imam should  intend  to lead the prayer  in order to 
obtain  superiority,  but if he does not do, the prayer  of those  who pray behind  
him will be considered  as valid,  particularly  in case they intend  to follow  him in 
prayer  and thus they will obtain  the superiority  of congregational  prayer.  Then,  let 
the imam  recite the invocation  of inauguration  and seeking  refuge  (with Allah  
from Satan) in a low tone, like him who prays alone, and recite aloud the 
Opening  of the Book (Al-Fatihah)  in addition  to a Surah (from the Qur'an)  in 
both rak'ahs  of the Morning  prayer,  and the first two of both Maghrib  and Isha'  
prayers,  the same  as he who prays  alone  does.  Let him also utter "Amen"  aloud  in 
those  rak'ahs  in which  he recites  aloud.
He who prays  behind  the imam  should  also do the same,  making  his "Amen"  
synchronous  to that of the imam.  After finishing  from reciting  Al-Fatihah,  the 
imam should keep silent for a short interval  to take his breaths  and give  
opportunity  to him who prays behind  him to recite  Al-Fatihah  in a low tone, in 
order to be ready to pay his attention  to the imam's  recitation.  He who prays  
behind  the imam should not recite the Surahs  in the prayers  in which the 
recitation  is aloud  unless  he is not able to hear the voice  of the imam.
On raising  his head from bowing,  the imam  should  say: "Allah  hears such as 
praises  Him",  and so should  do he who prays behind  him. Furthermore,  let his 
Tasbihs  (Exaltations)  in both bowing  and prostration  be no more  than three.  Let 
him also in the first Tashahhud  say nothing  more after his invoking  Allah's  
Blessing  and Prayer  upon  Muhammad  and upon the family  of Muhammad;  and 
let him recite  nothing  more than Al-Fatihah  in the last two rak'ahs.  Let not him 
make  it too lengthy  upon  the people  to bear, nor say anything  in his invocation  in 
the last Tashahhud  more than bearing  testimony  to the fact that here is no god 
but Allah  and that Muhammad  is His Messenger,  and invoking  Allah's  Prayer  and 
Blessing  upon  the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him".
Let the imam's  intention  by his salutation  be to salute the angels and the 
people,  and let the people's  intention  by their salutation  be to return  the greeting  
to him. Then,  let the imam  become  firm for a while  until the people  finish  from  
their salutation,  after  which  let him face them,  it is much  better  for him to remain300


Page 303:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer
when  there  are women  praying  behind  men,  until they turn away  before  him. Let 
none of the praying  people  stand and turn away before  the imam stands  and 
turns  away  rightward  or leftward  as if he likes,  even  though  turning  from  the right  
side is much  dearer  to me.
Let not the imam favour  himself  with the supplication  in the Qunut  of the 
Morning  Prayer:  but rather,  let his invocation  include  the praying  people  behind  
him like: "O Allah! Guide  us (to the right way)' 1 which  he should  recite aloud,  
with the people  praying  behind  him saying  "Amen",  raising  their hands  alongside  
their breasts,  and passing  the hands over the faces at the conclusion  of 
supplication,  depending  upon  a certain  narration  which  has been handed  down  in 
that respect,  otherwise,  it is customary  not to raise the hand,  as it is the case at the 
conclusion  of Tashahhud.301
The Taboos
The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" forbade  the following  in the 
prayer:  he forbade  Safn, i.e. to raise one leg apart from the other;  Safd, i.e. to 
bind both feet together  as if in a fetter. He forbade  practicing  Iq'a', which  is, 
according  to the linguists,  to sit on both hips and set up both knees  and place  
both hands  on the ground  in the same  way as a dog does,  and according  to the 
traditionists,  to sit on both legs, with only the tips of toes and both knees on 
the ground.
He also forbade  Sadi, and it is, according  to the traditionists,  to wrap  
oneself  in his garment  and get his hands  into it and bow and prostrate  as such.  
However,  this was the custom  of the Jews in their prayer,  thereupon  they (the 
Muslims)  were forbidden  to imitate  them.  The same is true of the shirt with  
which  one should  not wrap himself  and offer  bowing  and prostration  with his 
hands  inside  it. It is said also that it means  that one puts the middle  portion  of 
the upper  garment  on his head, and let both its ends fall on his right and left 
sides,  leaving  nothing  of it on his shoulders.  But the former  concept  is nearer  
to the truth.
He further  forbade  Kaft, which  is to tuck up his garment  from between  his 
hands or from behind  his back whenever  he intends  to prostrate.  This also 
applies  to the hair, and thus one should  not pray while raising  his hair, even  
though  this forbiddance  is limited  to men. According  to an authentic  narration  
(the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him") said: "I was commanded  to 
prostrate  on seven parts of the body, and not to tuck up hair or garment."  
Ahmad  Ibn Hanbal  disliked  that one should  put his lower  garment  over his shirt  
in prayer,  seeing  that it belongs  to Kaft.
He forbade  Ikhtisar,  i.e. to place one's hands  on his flanks.  The Messenger  of 
Allah also forbade  Salb, i.e. to put one's hands on his flanks while standing,  
making  a space  between  his forearms  and sides.  He forbade  Muwasalah  which  is 
divided  into five aspects,  two of which  are due upon  the imam,  i.e. not to join his 
recitation  with the Takbir  of assuming  the prayer,  and not to join his bowing  with  
his recitation;  and two are due upon him who prays behind  him, i.e. not to join


Page 304:
'
302 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
the Takbir  of assuming  the prayer  with the Takbir  of the imam,  and not to join 
his End Salutation  (Taslim)  with the imam's;  and one is common  between  them,  
i.e. not to join the first salutation  (Taslim)  which  is obligatory  with the last one,  
and he rather  should  make  a short  break  between  both.
He further  forbade  that one should  pray while  being  constrained  by urine or 
excrement.  The prayer  of him who is putting  on a narrow  footwears  is also 
forbidden.  That's  because  all of diose things hinder  one from submissiveness;  
and of course,  this applies  to the prayer  of the hungry  or the distressed  worried  
person.  The forbiddance  of the prayer  of the hungry  is understood  from the 
narration  (of Ibn Umar and A'ishah  in which the Messenger  of Allah said):  
"When  the supper  is served  and the Isha' prayer  is established,  you should  start  
with having  your supper  unless  there is no enough  dme."  According  to another  
narration:  "Let none  of you enter  the prayer  while  being  frowned  (out of anxiety),  
and let none  of you offer  prayer  while  being  angry."
According  to Al-Hassan:  "Every  prayer  in which  the heart  is not submissive  is 
much  swifter  to lead to punishment."  According  to another  narration:  "There  are 
seven  things  caused  by Satan in prayer:  nose-bleeding,  slumber,  whisper  of evil 
thought,  yawning,  scratching,  turning  sideways,  and playing  with tilings"  and 
(forgetfulness  and suspicion"  according  to some additions.  According  to one of 
the early men: "There  are four things  one does in prayer  out of desertion:  turning  
sideways,  passing  the hand over the face, leveling  the pebbles,  and offering  prayer  
in a road where  the people  pass in front  of him."
It is also forbidden  in prayer  that one should  interlace  or clack his fingers,  or 
cover  his face, or put one of his hands  over the other  and get them in between  
his thighs  while  bowing.  In this connection,  one of the holy companions  "Allah  
be pleased  with them"  said: "We did so at first and then we were forbidden  to do 
it." it is also undesirable  to blow in the ground  on prostrating  for the purpose  of 
cleansing  it, or to level the gravel  with one's  hand:  all of those  are worthless  acts.
Furthermore,  one should  not raise any of his feet and place it over his thigh,  
nor recline  in his standing  against  a wall, and if he reclines  against  a wall in such a 
way as he should  fall down  on removing  that wall, his prayer  would  be invalid;  
and Allah  Almighty  knows  best.
The Differentiation  between  obligatory  duties  and Traditional
Practices  Of Sunnah
What  have been mentioned  include  many  acts which  belong  to the obligatory  
duties,  others  to the Prophetic  practice,  some to the etiquette  and states which  
such as seeks  after the way to the hereafter  should  observe.  From  amongst  them,  
twelve  belong  to the obligatory  duties,  i.e. the intent,  Takbir ; standing,  reciting  Al- 
Fatihah,  bending  in bowing  so much  until one's  palms  are completely  placed  over  
both knees  and he feels at east in that position,  raising  from  it and being  erect  in 
standing,  falling  in prostration  until one feels at ease in that position,  without  
spreading  the arms flat on the ground,  raising  from  it and being  upright  in sitting,  
sitting  for reciting  the last testification  (Tashahhud),  reciting  the last testification


Page 305:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer
^Tashahhud),  invoking  Allah's Prayer and Blessing  upon the Prophet,  and 
concluding  with the first Salutation,  for the intent  of coming  out of the prayer,  it 
is not obligatory;  and what  is beyond  that is not binding  so much  as it belongs  to 
the Prophetic  practice  and states  which  should  be observed.
From among  the acts which  belong  to the Prophetic  practices  of sunnah,  a 
mention  might  be made of four things:  raising  both hands  on reciting  Takhir  of 
assuming  the prayer,  on bending  for bowing,  on raising  for standing,  and on 
sitting  for reciting  the first Tashahhud.  The way of spreading  and the limit of 
raising  fingers  as we've mentioned  them are supplementary  to those Prophetic  
practice;  and reclining  on both hips and spreading  the left leg are supplementary  
to the sitting;  and lowering  the head and refraining  from turning  sideways  (in the 
prayer)  are supplementary  to the standing,  and doing  it up. As for the rest sitting,  
it is not regarded  one of the fundaments  of the Prophetic  practice  of acts, for it is 
like the betterment  of raising from the prostrating  posture  to the standing  
posture,  and thus it is not meant  in itself; and it is for this that there is no 
celebration  or invocation  particular  to it.
There  are several  celebrations  implied  in the Prophetic  practices  of sunnah,  
such as the invocation  of the opening  the prayer,  seeking  refuge  (with  Allah from  
the evil of Satan,  the despised),  the saying  of "Amen",  all of which  are out of the 
assured  practices  of the Prophet.  But there are other  celebrations,  which,  being  
out of the sunnah,  are of different  degrees,  such as the recitation  of the Surahs  in 
the prayer (after Al-Fatihah),  Takhirs  of moving  from a posture  to another,  
Tasbihs  (Exaltation)  in both bowing  and prostration  and the celebrations  which  
are said in between  them,  the first Tashahhud,  and invoking  Allah's  Prayer  and 
Blessing  upon the Prophet  therein,  the invocation  at the conclusion  of the last 
Tashahhud,  and the last salutation,  since four of those should  be compensated  
for (in case of being  elapsed)  with the prostration  of forgetfulness.
But there is only one act (which  might  be dealt with similarly),  i.e. the first 
sitting  for reciting  the first Tashahhud,  which  is very influential  in the sequence  
of the parts of the prayer  at least in the sights  of its beholders,  since  with which  
the four-rak'ah  prayer  might  be distinguishable  from that which is not, unlike  
raising  both hands,  which  has no effect  in that respect;  and for this reason,  those  
influential  acts are called particles.  In this context  it is said that the particles  
should  be compensated  with prostration,  even though  all the celebrations  and 
exaltations  do not require  the prostration  of forgetfulness  (in case they are 
missed)  barring  three: the Qunut,  the first Tashahhud,  and invoking  Allah's  
Prayer  and Blessing  upon the Prophet  therein,  unlike Takhirs  of moving  from  
one posture  to another,  Tasbihs  of both bowing  and prostration,  and the 
celebrations  in between  them.
That's because  both bowing  and prostration,  in their very form, do not 
correspond  to the habit  and it is with them that the worship  is achieved,  even in 
the absence  of Tasbihs  and Takhirs  of movement;  and in this way, the absence  of 
those  Tasbihs  does not change  this form  of worship.  The same  does not apply  to 
the sitting  for reciting  the first Tashahhud,  which  corresponds  to the habit,  and303


Page 306:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
its purpose  is just for reciting  Tashahhud.  For this reason,  leaving  it is clearly  
influential.  Therefore,  leaving  both the supplication  of opening  the prayer  and 
reciting  the Surah  has no effect,  seeing  that the standing  is inhabited  with Al- 
Fatihah,  by which  it might  be distinguishable  from  the habit.
The same is true of the supplication  in the last Tashahhud,  and the Qunut,  
which  might  unlikely  be compensated  for with prostration.  But it is for it that 
prolonging  the posture  of standing  straight  in the Morning  prayer  has been laid,  
just like prolonging  the rest sitting,  which has become,  after having  being  
prolonged,  and in the presence  of Tashahhud,  a sitting for reciting  the first 
Tashahhud.  In this way, this prolonged  standing  (in which  Qunut  is practiced  in 
Morning  prayer)  has become  usual in which no celebration  is obligatory.  To 
mention  such prolonged  standing  of Morning  prayer  is to leave out the posture  
of standing  in prayers  other than the Morning,  and its being void of any 
obligatory  celebration  is to keep away  from  the basic  standing  in the prayer.
Nevertheless,  you might  say: "Of a surety,  it is reasonable  to differentiate  the 
obligatory  duties  from  Prophetic  practices  of sunnah,  since  in the absence  of the 
former  the prayer  becomes  invalid,  and the punishment  is decided  in accordance  
with it, and this is not true of the sunnah.  But, it is meaningless  to differentiate  a 
certain  item of sunnah  from another,  even though  all are commendable,  and 
there is no punishment  for leaving  all of them, and each of them brings  about  
reward  when  it is done."
It should  be known  to you then that their sharing  in reward,  punishment  and 
even commendation  do not cancel  out their difference;  and let's explain  this fact 
to you with the following  example:  a man could not be a human  being  of full 
entity  except  through  an inward  content  and outward  organs.  The inward  content  
includes  both life and soul, and the outward  organs  are the parts of his body.  
Some  of those  parts are essential  in the sense  that in the absence  of any of them,  
the man perishes,  such as the heart,  the liver and the brain,  in addition  to each  
organ  with the lack of which  the life comes  to an end. Some  of those parts are 
not crucial  to the life itself  so much  as to its purposes,  such as the eye, the hand,  
the leg, and the tongue.  Some  parts are not essential  either  to the life or to its 
purposes  so much  as they are to the beauty,  such as the eyebrows,  the beard,  the 
eyelashes,  and the good colour.  Some parts are not essential  to the origin of 
beauty  so much as they are to its perfection,  such as the bow-form  of the 
eyebrows,  the blackness  of the beard,  the eyelashes,  the harmony  and proportion  
of the features,  and red-white  complexion.  Those  are the different  ranks of the 
parts  of body.
The same  is true of the religious  service:  it is an image  painted  by law, and we 
have acquired  it by our worship.  Its inward  soul and life are the submission,  the 
intent,  the presence  of the heart,  and sincerity,  as it will be discussed  later. But 
now we are dealing  with its outward  parts. Bowing,  prostration,  standing  and all 
the pillars  (which  are obligatory  duties)  act as its heart,  liver and brain,  since in 
their absence  the prayer  becomes  invalid;  and such of Prophetic  practices  of 
sunnah as we've mentioned  like raising both hands, the invocation  of304


Page 307:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
inauguration,  and the first Tashahhud  act as its hands,  legs, eyes, since in their  
absence  the prayer  is still valid,  in the same  way as life does not come  to an end 
with the lack of those  parts; and as well as the man which  lacks them becomes  
disfigured  and ugly, and disliked  by others,  he who restricts  himself  to the 
minimum  requirements  therewith  the prayer  is valid  is like a man who presents  to 
one of the kings  a living  slave,  whose  limbs  are cut off.
The states which  are beyond  the traditional  practices  of sunnah  act as the 
aspects  of beauty,  like the eyebrows,  the beard, the eyelashes  and the good  
colour.  The functions  of celebrations  in those  traditional  practices  of sunnah  are 
supplementary  to the beauty,  the same  way as are the bow-form  of the eyebrows,  
the roundness  of the beard,  etc. the prayer  should  be in your sight in the same  
position  of a present  or a gift therewith  to approach  the Presence  of the King  of 
all kings,  like a chambermaid  to be presented  to the magistrates  by him who seeks  
after approaching  their presence.  To be sure, this present  is displayed  to Allah  
Almighty  (to evaluate),  and it will be returned  back to you to see on the Day of 
the Greater  Testing;  and it is up to you to choose  whether  to embellish  or deface  
its form,  for if you do good,  it will be for your benefit,  and if you do bad, it is for 
your  loss .
Let not your portion  of jurisprudence  to know  the distinction  between  what  is 
obligatory  and what is out of sunnah,  therewith  you will not understand  from  
amongst  its characteristics  what  is beyond  the fact that there is no sin in leaving  
it, thereupon  you will leave  it; for indeed,  this is like the statement  of a physician:  
"It is true that gouging  out the eyes does not put an end to man's  existence",  but 
he does it to be truthful  in his hope of approaching  the presence  of the 
magistrate,  in a form of a gift. In this way you should  the different  ranks of the 
traditional  practices,  states and manners:  however,  every prayer  in which one 
does not perfect  its related  bowings  and prostrations,  will be the first opponent  
to him (on the Day of Judgement)  saying:  "Might  Allah  ruin you in the same  way 
as you wasted  me." So, go through  the different  narrations  we've  related  in the 
perfection  of the pillars of the prayer,  perchance  its effect might have its 
influence  upon  you.305
CHAPTER  THREE:  ON THE INTERNAL  CONDITIONS  
OF THE HEART  S WORKS
In this chapter,  let's explain  the relationship  between  prayer  and submission  
and the presence  of the heart,  and then make  a mention  of the internal  meanings:  
their limits,  reasons,  and remedies,  and then discuss  what should  be present  in 
each one of the prayer's  pillars,  in order to be valid for the provision  of the 
hereafter.
The Exposition  Of The Necessity  Of Submission  
And Heart's  Presence
It should  be known  that there are so many proofs  for that concept;  and a 
mention  might  be made  here of Allah's  statement:  "And  establish  prayer  regularly  
for the celebration  of My Praises."  ^Ta Ha 14)


Page 308:
306 The quarter  of the acts of worship
4 ^ s^ *3 j-p li ^
The obligation  of submission  appears  evident  here since heedlessness  
stands  in opposition  to celebration:  so, how he who proves  heedless  in all of 
his prayer  be able to establish  prayer  for celebrating  Allah's  Praises?  He 
Almighty  further  says: "Be not of the heedless.  "It is forbiddance  whose  
apparent  meaning  is the prohibition  (of heedlessness).  He says too: "Until  you 
become  well-aware  of that which  you say." It gives proper  justification  for 
forbidding  the drunk  from offering  prayer  while  being  under  the influence  of 
intoxication;  and of a surety,  it applies  to the heedless,  who is involved  in 
anxiety  and concerned  with evil suggestions  and material  thoughts  of this 
world.
The statement  of the Messenger  of Allah: "Verily,  prayer  is only (to show)  
meekness,  humility..."  restricts  the concept  to the prayer  with the help of the 
definitive  article,  and the adv 'only' plays the role of ascertaining  and confirming  
the fact. It plays the same role as it plays in the narration  of pre-emption,  from  
which  the jurisprudents  apply  the concept  to what  is not restricted  by exclusion,  
affirmation  or negation.  The Prophet  said: "He, whose  prayer  does not forbid  
him from  doing  what  is shameful  and vile will not become  but much  farther  from  
(the Presence  of) Allah."  To be sure, by no means  should  the prayer  of the 
heedless  prevent  him from committing  what  is shameful  and vile.
He further  said: "Many  are the standing  persons  (to perform  prayer),  whose  
portion  (from  their prayer)  is no more than fatigue  and exhaustion."  There  is no 
doubt  that it is the heedless  who is intended  here. He said too: "A servant  will 
have no portion  from his prayer  more than that of which  he is well-aware."  The  
truth of matter  here is that the prayer  is a private  conversation  of a servant  with  
his Lord Almighty,  according  to the different  narrations,  and of a surety,  in no 
way could  the speech  of the heedless  be regarded  as a private  conversation.
To explain  that, if one is heedless  of the obligatory  charity,  for example,  it in 
itself  is in opposition  to one's desires  and passions,  and difficult  upon the soul;  
and so is fasting,  in its overcoming  the strong  and breaking  the power  of desire,  
which  is an instrument  of the devil,  Allah's  enemy,  and thus it is not unlikely  that 
its purpose  might be achieved  even though  with heedlessness;  and the same  
applies  to Hajj, whose  acts is troublesome  and heavy,  in which  one strives  his 
utmost  so much  enough  that he is vulnerable  to suffering,  whether  the heart  is or 
is not present.
But the prayer  has nothing  to do other  than celebration  and recitation,  bowing  
and prostration,  standing  and sitting. As for the celebration,  it is a kind of 
relationship  and private  conversation  one establishes  with Allah  Almighty,  whose  
purpose  is either  to be a dialogue  and conversation  (with the Lord),  or no more  
than the utterance  of letters  and sounds,  by way of examining  the tongue  with  
such act, in the same  way as both the stomach  and the private  parts  are examined  
by refraining  (from  food and sexual  intercourse)  during  fasting,  and the body is 
with the hard works  of Hajj, and the heavy  and difficult  affliction  resulting  from


Page 309:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
giving  the obligatory  charity  out of one's property,  which  is the dearest  of his 
possessions.  Of a surety,  this (latter)  division  is poindess:  how easy it is upon a 
heedless  person  to move his tongue  with such nonsense,  in which  there is no 
examination  as it is not a deed.
Therefore,  the main purpose  is to utter letters  and sounds,  and this utterance  
could  not be meaningful  unless  it expresses  what  lies in one's  conscience,  and this 
expression  could not accomplished  unless  the heart is present.  What  is then the 
significance  of asking  Allah to guide  us to the straight  way in the absence  of the 
heart  and in case its real purpose  is not the imploradon  and supplication?  Which  
difficulty  is it to move one's tongue  with that even though  he is heedless  
particularly  when  he has been accustomed  to such utterances?
This is, however,  the rule which  governs  celebrations.  Moreover,  let me say 
that if one, for instance,  takes oath to give thanks  and praise  somebody,  and ask 
him for something,  and during  his sleep,  the words  which  express  the concept  of 
thanks  and praises  run on his tongue,  he will not be considered  to have fulfilled  
his oath; and if those words also run on his tongue  in the darkness,  in the 
presence  of the other  man whom  he does not recognize  nor see, he also will not 
be regarded  to have fulfilled  his oath, since his words  could not be regarded  as 
significant  speech  and dialogue  unless  he is present  in his heart. If those  words  
run on his tongue  while the other man is present  but he (the speaker)  even  
though  in the whiteness  of the day, is heedless,  as being  fully concerned  with a 
certain  thought,  and his purpose  is not to address  the other, he will not be 
regarded  to have fulfilled  his oath.
Undoubtedly,  the purpose  of celebration  and recitation  (in the prayer)  is to 
give thanks  and praise,  implore  and invoke  (Allah  Almighty),  and the addressee  
here is Allah  Almighty;  and of course  the heart  of the heedless  is veiled  from Him  
with the veil of heedlessness,  which  hinders  him from Seeing  or watching  His 
Glory. Moreover,  he is heedless  of the Addressee,  but his tongue  moves,  by 
nature  of things:  how far is that from the real purpose  of the prayer,  which  has 
been set to polish the heart, and renew  the celebration  of Allah's  Praises,  and 
affirm  the bond  of faith through  it. This is the rule which  governs  both recitation  
and celebration.  In brief, there is no way to deny this characteristic  as far as 
utterance  is concerned,  therewith  it is distinguishable  from the act.
As far as bowing  and prostration  are concerned,  there is no suspicion  that the 
main purpose  of both is to exalt Allah Almighty;  and had it been permissible  to 
exalt ALlah Almighty  while one is heedless  of Him, surely,  it would  have been  
permissible  to exalt an idol placed  in front of him, of which  he is heedless,  or to 
exalt a wall in front  of him, of which  he is heedless;  and if it is not the exaltation  
which  is intended,  there remains  only the movement  of both the head and the 
back, in which there is no difficulty  for establishing  any kind of examination  
upon  which  the fundament  of religion  is based,  and with which  the faith might  be 
distinguishable  from  disbelief,  and for which  it is put forward  in sequence  before  
Hajj and all religious  service,  and because  of leaving  which  one should  be killed.
I do not think but that all of this great significance  and importance  is not307


Page 310:
308 The quarter  of the acts of worship
given  to prayer  depending  only  upon  its outward  acts, but also the purpose  of the 
private  conversation  therein  should  be implied,  therewith  it is put forward  before  
fasting,  obligatory  charity,  Hajj, etc, including  even the offering  of sacrifices  
which is a self-mortification  through  deducing  from one's property.  Allah  
Almighty  says: "It is not the flesh nor the blood  (of the sacrifice)  which  reaches  
Allah,  but it is piety which  reaches  Him from you." This means  that it is the 
characteristic  which  prevails  over the heart and drives  it to comply  with Allah's  
Commands  and Orders  which  is required:  what  then about  the prayer  whose  acts 
are meaningless  in themselves?  This is, to be sure, a good  proof  for the necessity  
of the presence  of the heart  (in prayer).
Nevertheless,  you might  say: "If you render  as invalid  the prayer  (in which  
one's heart is not present),  and make the presence  of the heart an essential  
condition  to hold it valid, you then will have differed  from the unanimity  of 
almost  all the jurisprudents,  who make it not necessary  (for the validity  of the 
prayer  that one should  have)  the heart  present  but only  on Takhir!'
It should  be known  that, as we've  mentioned  in the Book  of Knowledge,  the 
jurisprudents  have nothing  to do with the internal  acts and deeds,  nor they are 
required  to split open the breasts  to know  what lies within  hearts,  nor are they  
responsible  for the way to the hereafter:  what concerns  them is the rules and 
judgements  of religion  in accordance  only with the external  works  and deeds  of 
the organs,  and of a surety,  the external  works  of the organs  (as far as prayer  is 
concerned)  is sufficient  to cancel  out the punishment  of killing  and the reproach  
of the ruler; and that it might  be of benefit  in the hereafter,  it is not within  the 
limits  of jurisprudence  to decide  it. Furthermore,  there  could  not be any claim  of 
such unanimity.
It is narrated  by Abu Talib  Al-Makki  on the authority  of Bishr  Ibn Al-Harith  
from  Sufyan  Ath-Thawri  that he said: "He, who does not prove  submissive  in his 
prayer, there wall be no access for his prayer (to be accepted  from  
him)."According  to Al-Hassan:  "Every  prayer  in which  one has not his heart  
present  is swifter  to have punishment  inflicted  upon  him."  According  to Mu'adh  
Ibn Jabal:  "He, who (addresses  himself)  intentionally  to recognize  him who is on 
both his right and left while  being  in prayer,  no prayer  should  be accepted  from  
him."  According  to an unidentified  narration,  the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be 
upon him" said: "A servant  might  offer a prayer  (in which  he is heedless)  from  
which  not its sixth nor even its tenth  would  be written  for him; for indeed,  it is 
only that of which  a servant  is well-aware  from his prayer  which  is written  for 
him."
However,  if this narration  is transmitted  from anyone  other  than the Prophet,  
it would  be adopted  as doctrine:  how then should  we not adhere  to it (seeing  that 
it is narrated  from the Prophet)?  According  to Abd Al-Wahid  Ibn Zaid: "The  
learned  men of religion  are unanimous  on the fact that a servant  will have  
nothing  to be written  for him from his prayer  but that of which  he is well-aware  
from it. "Do you not see how he makes  it unanimity?  However,  what  is narrated  
from the jurisprudents  endued  with piety and devoutness  as well as from the


Page 311:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  —
learned  men of the hereafter  is beyond  calculation.
It is true to refer  in this respect  to the evidences  of law which  attest  that; and 
the traditions,  narrations  and stories  which  support  it is too obvious  to explain  
that condition.  Nevertheless,  the position  of religious  and legal  verdicts  pertaining  
to the external  enjoinment  is estimated  in accordance  with the people's  
defectiveness:  in no way could  it stipulate  as a necessary  condition  the presence  
of the heart  in all parts of the prayer,  which  all but a few fail to achieve.  If it is 
not possible  to make  the full presence  prerequisite  (to the validity  of the prayer)  
for necessity,  there  is no way for him but to make  what  might  be described  by its 
name essential  at least to a single  moment  (in the prayer);  and the moment  of 
Takhir  is the most  fitting  for it, to which  the enjoinment  has been  limited  for this 
reason.309
Therefore,  we hope that the state of the heedless  in all of his prayers  is 
unlike that of him who leaves prayer entirely,  for the former  takes the 
initiative  to do the external  deed, and has his heart present  at a single  
moment;  and how should  it not be so, since the prayer  of him who offers  
prayer  while  his ablution  is broken  forgetfully  is invalid  in the Sight  of Allah  
Almighty,  even though  the reward  of his deed therein  will be recorded  for 
him, in accordance  with his defectiveness  and excuse?  But even with thi: 
hope,  it is feared  that his state might  be worse  than that of him who leaves  
prayer;  and how should  it not be so, since the situation  of him, who attends  
the service  and deals slightly  with such presence  and speaks  with the speech  
of the heedless  scornful  is worse than him, who refrains  from the service  
entirely?  If the reasons  of both hope and fear are contradictory  and ready  to 
put man at risk, it is then up to you to choose  to be cautious  or to indulge.  
Nevertheless,  there is no hope for difference  from the jurisprudents  in their  
verdict  of the prayer's  validity  even with heedlessness,  since it is done by 
necessity  of verdict,  as we've  mentioned  earlier.
He, who is well-acquainted  with the mystery  of prayer  should  know  that the 
heedlessness  contradicts  it. But we've  mentioned  in the chapter  on the difference  
between  the external  and internal  knowledge,  in the Book of the Principles  of 
Creeds,  that the people's  defectiveness  is one of the important  reasons  for 
withholding  from disclosing  all that is revealed  of the mysteries  of law. So, let's 
limit our discussion  to this amount,  since  it is satisfactory  to him, who seeks  after  
the way to the hereafter;  and it is not our purpose  now to address  the debater  
rebel.
The main point  here is that the heart's  full presence  is the spirit  of the prayer,  
and its presence  at least on Takhir  is the slightest  thing  therewith  it survives,  and 
if it is less than that, it will perish,  and the more the presence  is, the more the 
spirit  is expanded  along  the different  parts of the prayer.  Many  are the living  who  
are almost  dead because  of their motionlessness.  Generally  speaking,  the prayer  
of the heedless  barring  the moment  of Takhir  is like a motionless  living:  we ask 
Allah  Almighty  for His Good  Aid.


Page 312:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
The Internal  Meanings  Therewith  The Prayer's  Life Is Perfect
It should  be known  that although  those  meaning  could  be expressed  in many  
different  ways and statements,  they might  be included  under  six things:  the full 
presence  of the heart,  comprehension,  exaltation,  reverence,  hope and shyness.  
Let's here make  a mention  of them  in detail,  their causes,  and the remedy  of the 
way of acquiring  them.
As for the details,  let's begin  with the full presence  of the heart,  by which  we 
mean that the heart should  be fully emptied  from anything  other than that in 
which  one is supposed  to be engaged,  and with which  he is speaking,  in such a 
way as to have the knowledge  of the related  act and deed limited  to them,  
without  being  occupied  by anything  else. However  one's thought  is diverted  to 
anything  else other  than that in which  he is supposed  to be engaged,  even though  
he remembers  it in his heart, of which he is not fully heedless,  the heart's  
presence  will then have been  achieved.
But to comprehend  the meaning  of the speech  is something  beyond  the 
presence  of the heart,  for perhaps  a heart might  be present  with the word even  
though  not with this meaning.  Thus,  to have the knowledge  of the heart  include  
the word's  meaning  is what we intend  by the comprehension.  Undoubtedly,  the 
people  are different  in that station,  for they do not join in the comprehension  of 
the same  meanings  of the Holy  Qur'an  and Tasbihs:  many  are the subtle  and nice 
meanings  which  a praying  man might  understand  in his prayer,  of which  he had 
never  thought  before  it. From this point  of view, the prayer  has been to forbid  
one from committing  what is shameful  and vile, for it makes  one realize  things  
which  helps  him inevitably  refrain  from  committing  what  is shameful.
As for exaltation,  it is something  beyond both heart's presence  and 
comprehension,  for a man might  talk to his servant  with his heart  present,  and he 
is well-aware  of the meaning  of his speech,  but even without  exalting  him. That's  
because  the exaltation  is something  besides  both.
As for reverence,  it is beyond  exaltation,  or in other  words,  it is a kind of fear 
caused  by exaltation,  for he who has no fear could not be called reverent.  The  
fear of a scorpion,  the bad temper  and likewise  despicable  characteristics  of a 
servant  is not described  as reverence.  What  might  be described  as reverence  is the 
fear of the exalted  magistrate,  for reverence  is a kind of fear whose  source  is 
veneration  and adoration.
As for hope, there is no doubt  that it is something  further,  for many  are the 
persons  who exalt a certain  king,  whom  they respect  and whose  power  they fear,  
but even they have no hope for his rewards.  In this context,  a servant  should  
have hope,  through  his prayer,  for the reward  of Allah  Almighty,  in the same  way 
as he should  have fear of His punishment  because  of his indulgence.
Concerning  shyness,  it is supplementary  to all of that, for it originates  
depending  upon the feeling  of indulgence  or committing  a sin; and of a surety,  
exaltation,  fear and hope could be imagined  in the absence  of shyness,  
particularly  when  there  is no feeling  of indulgence  or committing  sin.310


Page 313:
Book  four: The mysteries  and duties  of prayer
On the other hand, there are many causes  of those six things:  it should  be 
known  to you that the apprehension  is the main cause of the heart's  presence,  
since your heart follows  your apprehension  in such a way as it never  is present  
but in that which mainly  concerns  you. Whatever  your concern  might be the 
heart  is inevitably  present  willingly  or unwillingly,  and becomes  fully engaged  and 
restrained  to it. If one's heart  is not present  during  the prayer,  it will not be idle 
so much  as it will be occupied  in such matters  of this world  as with which  one is 
concerned;  and there is no way nor remedy  for having  the heart present  but by 
means  of diverting  one's main concern  to the prayer.  One's  concern  will not be 
diverted  to the prayer  unless  he is sure of the fact that it is through  it that the 
required  objective  could be achieved,  i.e. to have faith and trust in the fact that 
the hereafter  is much  better  and more  abiding,  and that it could  not be reachable  
but only through  the prayer.
If to that is added  the well-awareness  of the triviality  and inferiority  of this 
world  with all of its affairs  and vanities,  the heart  will come  to be fully present  in 
the prayer.  It is for likewise  reason  that your heart  will be present  once you stand  
before  one of the magistrates  who has no power  either  to benefit  or to harm  you.  
But if it is not present  at your private  discourse  with the King of all kings, in 
Whose  Hand is both kingdom  (of the earths)  and dominion  (of the heavens),  
Who  has the power  to benefit  and harm  you, think  not that there  is no reason  for 
it other  than your weak faith: so, strive  your utmost  to strengthen  your faith;  and 
the way to that is not our topic  in this discussion.
As to the matter  of comprehension,  it is caused,  after the full presence  of the 
heart, by the addiction  of thought  and the diversion  of mind to perceive  the 
meaning;  and its remedy  is the same as that of the heart's  presence,  in addition,  
one should  pay his main attendon  to the consideration  and endeavour  to avert  
the passing  thoughts;  and the way to avert the passing  thoughts  is to eradicate  
their materials,  i.e. to keep away from the causes  of attracting  those passing  
thoughts;  and as long as such materials  are not eradicated,  the passing  thoughts  
will not be diverted  from them. He, who loves a thing remembers  it so much.  
To be sure, the remembrance  of the beloved  necessarily  prevails  over the heart.  
For this reason,  it is thought  that he, who loves anything  other  than Allah,  his 
prayer  will not be void of passing  thoughts.
As for exaltation,  it is one of the heart's  states  which  is brought  about  from  
the knowledge  of two important  facts: the knowledge  of Allah's Glory and 
Greatness,  and this is one of the main fundaments  of faith: however,  he who has 
no faith in Allah's  Glory  and Greatness  will not submit  to exalt Him.  The second  
fact is to have knowledge  of the soul's despicability  and inferiority  as being  no 
more than a subjugated  slave which  is possessed  by the Lord. Those  two facts  
lead to submission,  humiliation  and subjection  to Allah  Almighty,  which  might  be 
described  as exaltation.
Nevertheless,  the state of exaltation  and submission  could not be held  
unless the knowledge  of the soul's inferiority  and contemptibility  and the 
knowledge  of the Glory  and Majesty  of Allah Almighty  are joined  together.311


Page 314:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
He who is independent  from others,  who feels secure  against  anything  that 
may befall  him could  probably  know  the greatness  of another,  even though  he 
is not in the state of exaltation  and submissiveness  to him, because  the other  
premise,  i.e. the knowledge  of the soul's  contemptibility  and neediness  has not 
been joined  with it.
As far as reverence  and fear are concerned,  they are of a state which is 
produced  in the soul by the knowledge  of Allah's Power, Authority  and 
supremacy  of His Will, and disinterestedness,  as well as the knowledge  of the fact 
that if Allah  Almighty  has destroyed  all the foremost  and the last, the former  and 
the latter generations,  by no means would this reduce anything  from His 
Dominion  even as little as an atom's weight.  Besides,  he should be well-  
acquainted  with such of distresses  and trials as to which  the Prophets  and saints  
were vulnerable,  in spite of Allah's  Power  to avert that from them, unlike  the 
kings of the different  parts of the earth (who apparendy  seem as if there were  
nothing  to befall  them).  In short,  the more  one becomes  knowledgeable  of Allah  
Almighty,  the more  he becomes  reverent  and afraid  of Him;  and this topic  will be 
discussed  in more detail in the Book  of Fear which  is implied  in the Quarter  of 
Saviors.
The hope results from the knowledge  of Allah's Kindness,  Generosity,  
Bounteousness,  encompassing  munificence,  nicedes  of making,  as well as from  
the certainty  of knowledge  of His Truthfulness  in His Promise,  i.e. the Garden  
for offering  prayer.  If one has certainty  of faith in His Promise,  and knowledge  of 
His Kindness,  of a surety,  the state of hope  will be produced.
The shyness  results  from one's feeling  of indulgence  in his religious  service,  
and the knowledge  of his failure  to fulfill the great  rights  of Allah  as they should  
be fulfilled.  This should  be strengthened  by the awareness  of the soul's defects  
and shortcomings,  lack of sincerity,  impiety  of innermost,  inclination,  in all of its 
acts and deeds,  to the urgent  fortune  of this world;  and all of that should  be 
joined  with the knowledge  of what  Allah's  Glory  and Majesty  impose  upon  men,  
and of the fact that He Almighty  learns  even the secrets  and the passing  thoughts  
of the heart, no matter  subde and hidden  they might be. If those kinds of 
knowledge  are accomplished,  of a surety,  a state which  might  be described  as 
shyness  will be necessarily  produced  therefrom.
Those  are the causes  and reasons  of those  traits,  and to be sure, the cause  of 
everything  that is to be acquired  should  be known  for its remedy,  since the 
knowledge  of the cause  leads,  by necessity  to the knowledge  of the remedy.  The  
uniting  bond of all of those causes  is the certainty  of faith, i.e. those kinds of 
knowledge  which  we've  mentioned  earlier;  and their being  certain  means  to have  
no suspicion  in them and rather have them prevail  over the heart as we've  
explained  in the exposition  of the concept  of certainty  in the Book of 
Knowledge.  The more the certainty  of faith is strong, the more the heart  
becomes  submissive.
For this reason,  A'ishah  "Allah  be pleased  with her" said: "The Messenger  of 
Allah "Peace  be upon  him" used to talk to us as well as we to him, and once the312


Page 315:
Book  four: The mysteries  and duties  of prayer 313
prayer  was due, he would  (stop from talking  to us) as if he did not recognize  us 
before  that as well as we did not know  him." It is narrated  that Allah Almighty  
revealed  to Moses  "Peace  be upon  him":  "O Moses!  When  you celebrate  Me, you 
should  celebrate  My Praises  with your  parts of body  trembling,  and be submissive  
and rest assured  at the moment  of celebrating  Me; and when  you celebrate  My 
Praises,  let (celebrating  Me be from the very depth of your heart as if) your  
tongue  follows  your heart,  and if you stand  before  Me, let it be the standing  of a 
humble  slave,  and talk to Me privately  with fearful  heart  and truthful  speech."
It is narrated  that Allah Almighty  revealed  to him: "Tell the disobedient  
among  your nation not to celebrate  My Praises,  for indeed,  I have made it 
binding  upon  Myself  to mention  him who celebrates  My Praises;  and thus if they  
(the disobedient)  celebrate  Me, I will mention  them with Curse."  If this is said 
about  a disobedient  who is not heedless  in his celebration:  what might  be said 
about  the heedless  disobedient.
Based  upon the different  states  of hearts  which  we've  mentioned,  the people  
are of different  states:  there is one who is heedless,  even though  he perfects  his 
prayer,  with his heart fully absent;  one who perfects  his prayer,  with his heart  
fully present  at its all moments,  and perhaps  he is mainly  concerned  with it to the 
extent  that he feels not of what  is taking  place  in front  of him. For this reason,  it 
is not unlikely  that Muslim  Ibn Yasar,  who was offering  prayer  in the mosque,  
made  no sense  to the collapse  of its pillar,  to which  the people  gathered.  It is said 
that one (of the righteous)  used to attend  the prayer  in congregation  for a long  
time, during  which he did not recognize  who was on his right or left. The 
groaning  of the heart  of (the Prophet)  Abraham  "Peace  be upon  him" was heard  
from a two-mile  distance.  It is further  narrated  that a group  of people  used to 
have their faces turn pale, and their body's  tremble  (once they are engaged  in 
their  prayer).
All of that is not improbable,  since its manifold  could be seen from the 
people's  concerns  with the affairs  and matters  of this world,  and fear of its 
kings and rulers,  in spite of their weakness,  failure  and baseness  of fortunes  
which  might  be gained  from them (in comparison  with the King of all kings),  
that one might  enter  into the presence  of a king or a minister  and talk to him 
about  what concerns  him, and when he comes  out and is asked about  who  
were present  around  him, or about  the garment  of this king or minister,  he 
would  not be able to tell about  that, for his attention  was fully diverted  to him  
from anything  else such as his garment  and those  who were present  around  
him.
To all are degrees  (or ranks)  according  to their deeds.  Everyone's  portion  from  
his prayer  varies in accordance  with the strength  of his fear, submission  and 
exaltation  he observes  to Allah Almighty,  for Allah  Almighty  looks at the hearts  
and not at the external  movements  of the organs  of the body. For this reason,  
one of the holy companions  "Allah  be pleased  with them"  said: "On the Day of 
Judgement,  the people  will be mustered  in the very state in which  they used to be 
in their  prayer,  of reassurance,  quietness,  feeling  of bliss and pleasure  therein."  Of


Page 316:
314 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
a surety,  he has told the truth. Each one will be mustered  in the same state in 
which  he dies, and each one will die in the same state in which  he lives. But it is 
the state of his heart  not of his body  that is to be observed,  since  it is from the 
characteristics  of the hearts  that the forms  will be made in the hereafter,  and 
none  will be saved  barring  him who will come  to Allah  with a sound  mind and 
heart:  we ask Allah  Almighty  to grant  us good  success  by virtue  of His Kindness  
and Generosity.
The Exposition  Of The Treatment  Which  Is Useful  
To The Heart's  Attentiveness
It should  be known  that the faithful  believer  should  entertain  the feelings  of 
exaltation,  fear, and hope of Allah  Almighty,  and shyness  of his failure  (to fulfill  
what is required  from him as it should  be). After  his faith, he should  persist  in 
those  states,  which  vary according  to the strength  of his certainty  of faith. There  
is no reason  for his failure  to persist  in them during  the prayer  other than the 
distraction  of his thoughts,  the division  of his mind,  the heart's  absence  from the 
private  discourse  (with  the Lord),  and the heedlessness  of the prayer.  To be sure,  
nothing  diverts  one from being attentive  to his prayer  other than the passing  
thoughts  in which  one is absorbed;  and there is no remedy  to make the heart  
attentive  other than to avert those passing  thoughts;  and nothing  could be 
averted  unless  its causes  are repelled.  So, it is useful  here to learn the causes  of 
such  passing  thoughts.
There are two sources  lying behind  the causes of the passing  thoughts:  
external  and internal.  The external  things apply to those which  might  hit the 
hearing  or appear  to the sight  in such a way as to attract  one's attention  until it 
follows  that thing  and goes on considering  it, from  which  another  idea might  be 
drawn  forth in a sequence  of thoughts,  in which  the sight becomes  the main  
cause  of thinking.  Then some  of those  ideas become  causes  of and give rise to 
others  (according  to what  might  be called  the association  of ideas).
Therefore,  he whose  intention  is firmly  strong  and attention  is powerful  will 
not be diverted  by whatever  touches  his senses.  But the weak one will have his 
mind distracted  and his thoughts  dispersed,  and his remedy  is to sever those  
causes,  either  through  lowering  his gaze, or offering  prayer  in a dark house,  or 
placing  nothing  in front of him which might occupy  his senses,  and rather  
approaching  the wall in order  to limit  the range  of his sight.  Let not him also pray  
in streets  where  there  are engravings  and handicrafts  or on dyed mats (or carpet).  
For this reason,  the worshippers  used to do their religious  service  in a small  dark  
house,  whose  width  was enough  only for the place  of prostration,  in order  to be 
able to concentrate  their  attentions  on their  worship.
But even the strong  among  them  used to attend  the prayers  in the mosques,  
since they were able to lower their gazes,  and limit it only to the location  of 
prostration,  thinking  that it was out of the perfection  of their prayer (to be 
wholeheartedly  devoted  to it to the extent  that they were) not to recognize  who  
their right  or on their left. It is narrated  that Ibn Umar  "Allah  be pleased was on


Page 317:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
with both"  used not to see in the praying  place  a Mushaf  or a sword  but that he 
would  take it away,  nor a book  but that he would  move  it aside.
But the external  causes are more serious  and dangerous,  for he whom  
concerns  take to the various  fields  of this world  could  not limit  his thought  to a 
certain  matter  apart from the others,  since it keeps flying from one side to 
another.  In this case, it is of no profit  to him to lower  his gaze, for what has 
concerned  the heart before  (assuming  the prayer)  is sufficient  to occupy  him 
entirely.  The way to remedy  this case is that one should  overpower  himself  to 
understand  what he is reciting  in his prayer,  by which  he should  engage  from  
anything  else. He might  be helped  to do so by getting  himself  ready before  
assuming  the prayer,  through  limiting  his thought  to the remembrance  of the 
hereafter  and the position  of private  talk (with his Lord),  and the severe  danger  
of standing  in front  of Allah  Almighty,  Who knows  everything.  Let him further  
empty  his heart,  before  assuming  the prayer,  from anything  that might  concern  
him (other  than the words  and deeds  of the prayer),  leaving  nothing  to occupy  
his thought.
In this context  (It is narrated  by Abu Dawud  that) the Messenger  of Allah  
"Peace  be upon  him" said to Uthman  Ibn Abu Shaibah  (or Uthman  Ibn Talhah,  
and this is more  right):  "I've forgotten  to tell you to cover  the vessel  which  in the 
house,  for there should  be nothing  to occupy  the people  from their prayer."  This  
is the way of dispelling  thoughts.  But even, if his raised  thoughts  could  not be 
dispelled  in this way, let him then take refuge  to the catalyst  which  removes  the 
matter  from  within  the veins.  It is to consider  those  affairs  which  divert  him from  
having  his heart  attentive;  and undoubtedly,  they are due to what  concerns  him in 
this world,  and nothing  concerns  him more  than his own desires  and lusts.
Having  understood  that, let him punish  himself  by refraining  from those  
desires  and desires  and severing  any relations  he might  have with them,  and be 
well-aware  of the fact that everything  that occupies  him from  his prayer  stands  in 
opposition  to his religion,  and rather  belongs  to the soldiers  of Satan,  Allah's  
enemy,  and to keep it is more  harmful  to him than to drive  it away  from  him. So, 
let him get rid of him by driving  it away,  in the same way as the Messenger  of 
Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" did, according  to the narration  (of A'ishah)  that when  
he put on the square  shirt  which  had marks  given  to him by Abu  Jahm  as a gift in 
which  he offered  prayer,  eh took  it off after his prayer  and said: "Send  it to Abu  
Jahm,  since it diverted  me from  my prayer,  and instead  bring  me back his rough  
woolen  shirt."
(According  to the narration  of Ibn Al-Mubarak  on the authority  of Abu An- 
Nadr)  the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" ordered  that the leather  strap  
of his sandals  be renewed,  and while  being  in his prayer,  he caught  a glimpse  of it, 
since it was new thereupon  he ordered  that the new leather  strap be removed  
from it, and that the old one be restored.  (According  to a narration  on the 
authority  of A'ishah)  he "Peace  be upon him" took on a new sandals  whose  
elegance  appealed  to him, thereupon  he fell in prostration  and said: "I've  
humbled  myself  before  my Lord Almighty  in order  not to abhor  me." Then,  he315


Page 318:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
set out while  wearing  it, and gave it to the first beggar  whom  he met. He further  
told Ali "Allah  be pleased  with him" to buy for him a leather  hairless  sandals  
which  he put on.
(It is narrated  by An-Nasa'i  on the authority  of Ibn Abbas  that) he "Peace  be 
upon  him" had in his hand a ring of gold before  gold was prohibited,  and when  
he was on the pulpit,  he threw  it away  and said: "This (ring)  has occupied  me by 
having  me cast a glance  at you and a glance  at it." (It is further  narrated  by Malik  
the authority  of Abdullah  Ibn Abu Bakr that) once Abu Talhah  (Al-Ansari)  
was offering  prayer  in a fenced  garden  belonging  to him when  he was fascinated  
by the feathers  of a bird which  was flying  among  the trees in search  for an exit.  
He kept looking  at it for a moment  and did not know  how much  he has prayed.  
He made  a mention  to the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon him" of how he 
was tempted  in his prayer  and said: "O Messenger  of Allah!  It is an object  of 
charity  (which  I give to make expiation  for my sin): place it wherever  and 
however  you like."
It is narrated  that another  man offered  prayer  in a fenced  garden  belonging  to 
him, whose  trees  were encircled  with fruits,  of which  he caught  a glimpse  during  
his prayer,  and they appealed  to him, with the result  that he did not know  how  
much  he has prayed.  He made a mention  of that to Uthman  "Allah  be pleased  
with  him" and said to him: "It is an object  of charity  (I give to make  expiation  for 
my sin): make  it in Allah's  Cause."  Uthman  sold it for fifty thousand  (Dirhams).  
This was their habit (whenever  they were afflicted  as such) in eradication  of the 
material  of thought,  and as expiation  for the reduction  of the prayer  which  they  
might  commit.
This is the treatment  which  eradicates  the material  of this ailment,  and nothing  
else could be of any benefit.  But such a way as we've mentioned  to dispel  
thoughts,  and reduce  it to the comprehension  of the celebration  (in the prayer)  
does not benefit  but in case of the weak  desires  and lusts,  and the concerns  which  
occupy  only the heart's  edges.  But this way is of no significance  in case of the 
strong  and tedious  desire,  which  you continue  to drive  away,  as well as it continue  
to attract  you until it overpowers  you and you will have then spent all of your  
prayer  in this mutual  attraction.
The parable  of him is like a man underneath  a tree who liked to have his 
thought  pure,  but the voices  of the birds troubled  his mind.  He drove  them to fly 
with a wood stick in his hand,  and then returned  to his thoughts,  but the birds  
returned  to making  noise  once again,  and he returned  to drive them  away.  It was 
said to him: "Those  are the tree's captives,  and if you like to get rid of that, cut 
off the tree." The same is true of the tree of desires  and lusts: if it ramifies  into 
many  branches  offshoot  from it, the thoughts  will be attracted  to it in the same  
way as the birds are to the trees, and the flies to the dirty things,  which one 
should  engage  himself  for a long time to drive away, for the more the flies are 
driven  away,  the more  they return  once again,  and from this it has been given  its 
name  (Dhubab  in Arabic).
The same  is true of the passing  thoughts.  On the other  hand,  the desires  and316
on


Page 319:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
lusts are so many,  and one could hardly  be free from them all. But they all 
belong  to one fundamental  thing,  which  is the love of this world.  This is, to be 
sure, the commencement  of every sin, the base of every defect,  and the 
resource  of every  mischief.  He, who has the love of this world  in his innermost,  
until he inclines  to anything  of it will not take his provision  (for the hereafter)  
from it, nor will he seek its aid for the attainment  of the hereafter.  So, let not 
him covet  to enjoy  of the pure pleasure  of the private  talk in the prayer,  for he 
who rejoices  with the hereafter  could not be able, at the same time, to grow  
happy  with Allah  Almighty,  nor with his private  talk with Him.
Of a surety,  one always  pays his full attention  to the pleasure  of his eye: if the 
pleasure  of his eye is this world,  his attention  will be inevitably  diverted  to it. But 
even, one should  not cease to mortify  himself,  and bring back his heart to be 
attentive  to the prayer,  and diminish  the causes  which  might  occupy  him from  it. 
This is the bitter  medicine,  and it is for its bitterness  that it has been abhorred  by 
the dispositions,  with the result  that the ailment  remained  constantly  chronic,  to 
the extent  that even the chiefs among  men endeavoured  to offer a two-rak'ah  
prayer,  in which  they would  have no passing  thoughts  about anything  of the 
matters  and affairs  of this world,  but they failed.  So, there  is no hope for the like 
of us to attain that, and would  that half or even one-third  our prayer  becomes  
free from the whisper  of the evil thoughts  and suggestions,  perchance  we would  
be from  among  those  who mix a good  deed  with an evil deed.
In short,  the parable  of the concern  of the world  and that of the hereafter  is 
like water  which  is poured  into a vessel  full of vinegar:  the vinegar  is spilled  out 
of it as much  as we get water  into it, and both  never  gather  together.
The Exposition  Of What  Should  Be Present  In The Heart  At Each
Pillar  Of The Prayer
Let's say, at first, that it is incumbent  upon  you not to be heedless  of these  tips 
pertaining  to the conditions  and pillars  of the prayer.  The conditions  prior to the 
prayer  comprise  the Call to prayer,  getting  purified  and performing  ablution,  
covering  the private  parts,  facing  the Qiblah,  standing  upright,  and the intent  (to 
pray).  When  you hear the Call to prayer,  you should  bring  to mind the terror  of 
the call on the Day of Judgement,  and thus endeavour  outwardly  and inwardly  to 
give a swift response  to this call, for indeed,  he who hastens  to respond  to this 
call will be (the first to be) called  with nicety  and kindness  on the Day of the 
Greater  trial.
So, examine  your heart  with this Call: if you find it filled with happiness  and 
good pleasure,  prompted  by desire  to give response  to it, you should  know  then  
that you will be called  with glad tidings  and felicity  on the Day of Decision.  For 
this reason,  he (Peace  be upon  him" said (according  to the narrations  of both  Ad- 
Daraqatni  and Abu Dawud):  "Relieve  us with it (the prayer)  O Bilal!"  he means  
with the prayer  and with the Call to it, for it was the pleasure  of his eye.
When you purify your praying  place, which represents  your farthest  
container,  then your garment,  which  represents  your closer  wrapper  then your317


Page 320:
318 The quarter  of the acts of worship
complexion  which  represents  your nearest  crust,  ignore  not your core, which  
comprises  your essence,  i.e. your heart:  endeavour  to purify  it through  showing  
repentance  and regret  for such (of your prayers  as) in which  you have indulged,  
and being  sure not to neglect  it once again  in the future:  it is with it that you 
should purify your innermost,  for it is that which your worshipped  God  
considers.
As to the covering  of the privates,  it should  be known  that it is to conceal  the 
shameful  parts of your  body  from the sight of the people.  However,  the external  
surface  of your body is an object  of the people ’s sight: what then about the 
reprehensible  things of your innermost,  and the disgraceful  matters  of your  
secrets,  which  none knows  barring  your Lord  Almighty?  So, put those  shameful  
things  in consideration,  and ask your soul to conceal  them (from  others),  having  
the assurance  that nothing  could  be concealed  from the Sight  of Allah  Almighty,  
but they might  be forgiven  by showing  regret,  shyness  and fear. The benefit  you 
receive  from putting  those in mind is to have the soldiers  of both fear and 
shyness  emerge  from their hiding  places,  therewith  you will be able to put your  
soul to humiliation,  and have your heart passive  and obedient  by virtue of 
shyness,  and stand  in front  of Allah  Almighty  in the same  way as does a criminal  
offensive  wayward  servant,  who shows  regret  and thus comes  back to his Lord,  
turning  down  his head,  out of shyness  and fear.
Facing  (the Qiblah)  means  to turn your face from all directions  to the Sacred  
House  of Allah  Almighty.  Do you not see then that it is not incumbent  upon  you 
to divert  your  heart  from  all the matters  and affairs  to be wholly  devoted  to Allah  
Almighty?  How far it is (from the truth)!  Nothing  is required  other than that.  
However,  all of those outward  acts are to motivate  the inward  mysteries,  adjust  
the organs  and make them passive,  by setting  them firm on one direction,  in 
order  that they should  not transgress  over the heart;  for if they transgress  over  
the heart and go astray  in their movements  and turning  to different  directions,  
the heart will be attracted  to them, and be diverted  from the Countenance  of 
Allah  Almighty.  So, turn the face of your heart to the same direction  to which  
you turn the face of your  body.
It should  be known  that as well as the face could hardly  be turned  to the 
direction  of the Sacred  House  unless  it is diverted  from all the other  directions,  
the heart also could hardly  be turned  to Allah Almighty  unless  it is emptied  
from anything  else. In this connection  he "Peace  be upon  him" said (according  
to an unidentified  narration):  "If a servant  stands  to his prayer,  with his passion,  
face and heart  turning  to Allah  Almighty,  he will turn away (from  the prayer  as 
pure and free from  sins) as he was on the day his mother  delivered  him."
To stand  upright  is to appear  and present  oneself  in person  and heart  in front  
of Allah  Almighty.  So, lower  your  head,  the highest  part of your  body,  and turn it 
down,  and let the lowering  of your head from its height  stimulate  you to have  
your  heart  stick  to humility,  submission,  and freedom  from  power  and arrogance,  
and let the commencement  of your celebration  be the severe  danger  of standing  
in front  of Allah  Almighty  in the terror  of the Day the people  will be displayed


Page 321:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
before Him for questioning.  But put in mind that you are, at the moment,  
standing  in front  of Allah  Almighty,  Who knows  all about  you. So, stand  in front  
of Him in the same  way as you might  stand  in front  of one of those  kings  of the 
world,  in case you fail to be well-acquainted  with the Essence  of His Glory  and 
Majesty.
Furthermore,  you should  always  put in consideration,  while  you are standing  
in your prayer,  that you are observed  and watched  by a caring  eye of a righteous  
pious man of your family,  or of anyone  whom  you desire to think of you as 
righteous,  for at that moment,  your limbs would  become  quiet, your organs  
submissive,  and all parts of your  body  passive,  for fear this poor  man (whom  you 
imagine  he is watching  you) should  ascribe  to you the lack of submission  and 
piety.  If you feel you are constant  while  being  watched  by a poor servant,  blame  
yourself  saying:  "You  claim  you know  and love Ailah  Almighty:  Do you not feel 
shy of daring  to deal with Him slightly,  even though  you have respect  for one of 
His servants?  Do you fear the people  and fear Allah  not, even though  Allah  has 
more right to be feared?"  For this reason,  when Abu Hurairah  asked the 
Messenger  of Allah:  "How  should  one feel shy of Allah?"  the Messenger  of Allah  
"Peace  be upon  him" said: "You should  feel shy of Him in the same way as you 
feel shy of a righteous  pious  man from  among  your  people  or your family."
The intent  here means  that you should  be sure to respond  to Allah  Almighty  
in compliance  to His Command  to offer prayer  perfectly,  during  which you 
should  refrain  from  what  might  repeal  or corrupt  it, and be in all of that, sincere  
(in your intention)  for the Sake of the Countenance  of Allah Almighty,  in the 
hope of His Reward,  and for fear of His Punishment,  seeking  to approach  His 
Presence,  and recognizing  His Grace  upon  you, which  is shown  in His permitting  
you to have private  conversation  with Him (in the prayer),  in spite of your bad 
manners  and disobedience.  You should  also regard  with high consideration  your  
private  discourse  with Him, and consider  in yourself  to Whom  you are 
privately,  how you talk to him privately,  and with which  words  and statements  
you talk to Him privately.  At that moment,  your forehead  should  sweat  out of 
shyness,  your  organs  should  tremble  out of reverence,  and your face should  turn  
pale out of fear.
As for Takhir, , once you utter  it with your tongue,  your heart should  not give  
lie to it. if there  is anything  in your  heart  greater  than Allah  Almighty,  Allah  bears  
witness  that you are a liar. If you tell the truth,  as Ailah  Almighty  bore  witness  to 
the hypocrites  in their statement:  "Verily,  he "Peace  be upon him" is the 
Messenger  of Allah",  consider  then yourself:  if your passion  prevails  over you 
more than the Command  of Allah Almighty,  of a surety,  you will be more  
obedient  to it than to Allah  Almighty,  for in this case, you will have taken  your  
passion  an object  or your worship,  and glorified  it; and thus your statement  
"Allah  is Greater"  comes  to be nearly  utterance  with the tongue,  to which  your  
heart fails to give trust. How  dangerous  is that, had it been for repentance  and 
asking  for Allah's  Forgiveness,  and the good thinking  of the Generosity  and 
Pardon  of Allah  Almighty.319
talking


Page 322:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
In regard  with the supplication  of inauguration,  the first word  to start with is: 
"I've set my face, firmly  and truly,  towards  Him  Who  created  the heavens  and the 
earth."  It is not the apparent  face that is intended  here,  for you've  turned  it earlier  
to the direction  of the Qiblah,  and of a surety,  Allah Almighty  is deemed  far 
beyond  any directions  to turn the face of your body towards  Him. But what is 
intended  is the face of your heart,  therewith  you should  turn to the Creator  of 
both the heavens  and the earth. Consider  then whether  it is turning  to its 
ambitions  and interests  in the house  and the market,  and thus following  its own  
desires  and lusts, or it is really turning  to the Creator  of the heavens  and the 
earth.320
Therefore,  let not the commencement  of your private  conversation  (with  
Allah)  with lies and fabrications,  putting  in mind that by no means  should  the 
face be turned  to Allah Almighty  unless  it is diverted  from anything  else. So, 
endeavour  at the moment  to turn it to Him;  and if you fail to do so continually,  at 
least be truthful  in your speech  at the moment.  If you say (in the beginning  of 
your supplication):  "Firmly  and truly as one who submits  to Allah  in Islam",  you 
should  put in mind that the real Muslim  is he, from (the evil of) whose  tongue  
and hand all of the Muslims  are safe. If you are not so, you will be a liar. For this 
reason,  strive yourself  to be sure to turn it whole (to Allah Almighty),  and 
endeavour  to show  repentance  and regret  for the previous  states (in which  you 
were  earlier).
If you say (in the beginning  of your supplication):  "And shall I never  ascribe  
partners  to Allah  (in service)",  put in consideration  the hidden  polytheism.  That's  
because  the statement  of Allah  Almighty:  "So, he, who expects  to meet his Lord  
(in the hereafter),  let him work righteousness  and ascribe  nothing  to Him in 
worship"  (Al-Kahf  110)
. f . ^ ^ __ ^
4 CJp) 1 "to-1 j wilyCo  J3 f LiJ 1 yrji 0^ ^
Was revealed  in connection  with him who intends,  with his worship,  not only  
Allah's  Countenance  but also the people  praise.  Be then careful  and fearful  of this 
kind of polytheism,  and feel shy of yourself  if you describe  your person  as not 
one of those  who ascribe  partners  to Allah  in worship,  without  being  really free 
from this kind of polytheism,  since the name of polytheism  applies  to all of its 
kinds  no matter  trivial  or significant  it might  be.
If you say: "Verily,  (the matter  of) my life and death belongs  only to Allah  
Almighty",  you should  know  that this state (described  by that sentence)  refers  to 
a servant,  whose  existence  is of no significance  to himself,  since  he exists  only for 
the service  of his Lord.  However,  if it issues  from him whose  pleasure  and anger,  
standing  and sitting,  desire  for life and fear of death  are determined  only for the 
sake of the matters  and affairs  of this world,  it will not be fitting  for the state at 
the moment.
If you say: "I seek refuge  with Allah from Satan,  the despised",  put in your  
mind that he is your avowed  enemy,  who lies in wait to divert  your heart and 
attention  from Allah  Almighty,  out of his envy of you for your private  dialogue


Page 323:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
with Allah  Almighty,  and prostration  to Him, though  he was cursed  because  of 
his failure to perform  even a single prostration  (in compliance  to Allah's  
Command).  But you're  seeking  refuge  with Allah Almighty  from him, through  
leaving  what he loves and rather  doing  what Allah  Almighty  loves could  not be 
achieved  only  by your statement.  It will be of no profit  for a man to say, in case a 
wild animal  or an enemy  intends  to attack  and kill him: "I seek shelter  from you 
with that strong  fort" while being  still in his place (unless  he moves  and enters  
that fort). He will not be given shelter  unless  he changes  the place (and rather  
takes  refuge  to the fort).
Similarly,  only the words  will be of no benefit  for him who follows  his own  
lusts and desires  which  are loved  by Satan,  and disliked  by (Allah)  Most  Gracious;  
for he should  join his words  with the firm resolution  to take refuge  to the shelter  
of Allah  Almighty  from the evil of Satan;  and it is (the statement)  "There  is no 
god but Allah"  which  constitutes  this shelter,  as confirmed  by Allah Almighty  
which  our Messenger  related  from Him (according  to the narrations  of both  Al- 
Hakim  and Abu Na'im  on the authority  of Ali): "(The  statement)  "There  is no 
god (to be worshipped)  is My Shelter:  so, whoever  enters  My Shelter  will be safe 
from My Punishment."  He who takes shelter  with it has none to worship  other  
than Allah  Almighty.  But he who takes as god his passion  is in the field of Satan,  
and not in the shelter  of Allah.
It should  be known  to you that it is out of his intrigues  to occupy  you in the 
prayer  by reminding  you of the affairs  of the hereafter,  and the way to arrange  
your good deeds,  in order to hinder  you from understanding  what you are 
reciting.  So, learn that everything  diverts  you from understanding  the meaning  of 
what you are reciting  in the prayer  is no more than a whisper  (from  Satan),  for 
indeed,  it is not the movement  of the tongue  that is intended  in itself  so much  as 
it is the meaning  which  lies behind  that movement.
As far as recitation  is concerned,  the people  are of three ranks: one whose  
tongue  moves,  even though  his heart  is heedless;  one whose  tongue  moves  and 
his heart follows  it in such a way as to understand  the meaning  of what he is 
reciting,  and hears  it as if he hears  it from another  person,  and this is the rank of 
the companions  of the right hand;  and one whose  heart  precedes  to understand  
the meanings,  and then the tongue  serves  it by interpreting  that meaning.  That  
the tongue  acts as interpreter  of the heart is one thing, and that it acts as its 
instructor  is another.  Allah's  nearest  devotees  are those whose  tongues  act as 
interpreters  and follow  their  hearts  and their  hearts  do not follow  their tongues.
To illustrate  the interpretation  of the meanings,  if you say "In the Name  of 
Allah, Most Gracious,  Most Merciful",  let your intention  with it to obtain  
(Allah's)  blessing  in the commencement  of your recitation  of Allah's  Speech,  and 
put in your  mind  the concept  that all matters  are in (the Hand  of) Allah  Almighty,  
and what  is intended  by the Name  here is the nominee  (i.e. Allah  Himself);  and if 
all the matters  are in (the Hand  of) Allah Almighty,  there is no doubt  that the 
praise  should  be to Allah  Almighty.  This means  that all thanks  should  be to Allah  
Almighty,  since all graces  and favours  are from Him;  and he, who thinks  there  is321


Page 324:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
any grace  or favour  from  anyone  else, or intends  anyone  else with his thanks  and 
praise,  ignoring  the fact that it is subjugated  by Allah  Almighty,  his mentioning  
the Name  of Allah  (as commencement),  as well as his praise  and thanks  are, to be 
sure,  imperfect  in so far as he turns  to anything  other  than Allah  Almighty.
If you say "Most  Gracious,  Most Merciful"  bring  in your heart all of His 
Kindness,  so that His Mercy  would  be clear to you, therewith  the hope (for it) 
would  be aroused  within  you. Then,  prompt  in your heart  both exaltation  and 
fear by the statement  "The King and Master  of the Day of Judgement".  The  
cause  of exaltation  is that there  is no king other  than He; and the cause  of fear 
is the terror  of the Day of Judgement  and reckoning,  of which  He is the King  
and Master.
Then,  renew  your sincerity  by saying:  "You we do worship",  and renew  the 
admission  of your failure,  neediness  and clearance  from both might  and power,  
by saying:  "And  Your  Aid do we seek."  Be certain  of the fact that by no means  
will it be easy for you to obey  Him unless  it is through  His Aid, and that you are 
indebted  to Him for it is He Who has enabled  you to obey Him, used you to 
worship  Him, and qualified  you to be fitting  for having  private  discourse  with  
Him;  and had He Almighty  deprived  you of such success,  you would  have been  
among  the dismissed  ones,  in the company  of Satan,  the despised.
Then, when you finish from seeking  refuge with Allah from Satan, the 
despised,  mentioning  the Name  of Allah  with the inaugurating  statement:  "In the 
Name  of Allah,  Most  Gracious,  Most  Merciful",  praising  Allah  Almighty,  asking  
Him for aid and help, designate  your question,  and demand  not but what  is the 
most  important  for you, saying:  "Guide  us to the straight  path",  which  drives  us 
to Your  Neighbourhood,  and make  us obtain  Your  Good  Pleasure.  Then,  explain  
that in more detail and confirm  it more, quoting  those from amongst  the 
Prophets,  the truly faithful  believers,  the martyrs  and the righteous  good men,  
upon  whom  He Almighty  bestowed  His Grace,  and not those  upon  Whom  wrath  
falls, i.e. the unbelievers  and those who deviate  from the true religion  from  
amongst  the Jews,  the Christians,  and non-religious  men.  Then,  seek the response  
(of your  supplication)  by saying  "Amen".
However,  if you recite  Al-Fatihah  in the prayer  as such,  you will seem  to be 
like those  about  whom  Allah  Almighty  said as the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be 
upon him" related  from Him (according  to the narration  of Muslim,  Abu  
Dawud  and others  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah):  "“I divided  (Al-Fatihah  
recited  in) the prayer  into two parts between  Me and My servant,  and he would  
have whatever  he asked for.” The Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him” further  said: “If the servant  said: “Praise  be to Allah,  the 
Cherisher  and Sustainer  of the worlds ”, Allah  Almighty  would  say: “My servant  
praised  me, and he would  have whatever  he asked for.” If he said: “Most  
Gracious,  Most  Merciful ”, Allah  Almighty  would  say: “My servant  commended  
Me, and he would  have whatever  he asked  for.” If he said: “The Master  of The  
Day of Judgement ”, Allah  Almighty  would  say: “My servant  glorified  Me, and 
this is for Me, and this Holy Verse  is divided  into two parts between  Me and322


Page 325:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer
My servant. ” If the servant  said: “Thy we worship  and Your Aid we seek”, 
Allah  Almighty  would  say: “This is something  between  Me and My servant,  and 
My servant  would  have whatever  he asked  for.” If the servant  said: “Guide  us 
to the straight  path; the path of those  upon  whom  You have bestowed  grace,  
and not those upon whom wrath falls, nor those who go astray ”, Allah  
Almighty  would  say: “This is for My servant,  and he would  get whatever  he 
asked  for”.”
If you have no portion  from your prayer  other  than Allah's  remembrance  of 
you in His Glory  and Magnificence,  it will suffice  you for good treasure:  What  
then about  such of His Reward  and Bounty  as you expect  from  Him?
Furthermore,  you should  be well-aware  of the meanings  of such of the Surahs  
from  the Holy  Qur'an  as you are reciting  in the prayer,  as it will be discussed  later  
in the Book  of the Recitation  of the Qur'an.  Be not heedless  of His Commands  
and Forbiddances,  His Promises  and Threats,  His admonitions  and the stories  of 
His Prophets,  and His Graces  and Favours  (He bestows  upon His servants).  
Each of those  has its own right: the hope is the right of the promise,  the fear is 
the right of the threat,  the resolute  power  is the right of both command  and 
forbiddance,  receiving  admonition  is the right  of the warning,  giving  thanks  is the 
right  of the remembrance  of the grace,  and taking  lessons  (and learning  by way of 
examples)  is the right  of the stories  of the Prophets.  In this respect,  it is narrated  
that when  Zurarah  Ibn Awfa  (one of the companions)  came  in his recitation  to 
His saying:  "Finally,  when  the Trumpet  is sounded"  (Al-Muddaththir  8)
i®
He fell dead. It is narrated  that whenever  Ibrahim  An-Nakh'i  heard  the saying  
of Allah Almighty:  "When  the sky is rent asunder",  he would  quiver  until his 
limbs and organs  would  tremble.  Abdullah  Ibn Waqid  said: "I saw Ibn Umar  
offering  prayer  while  being  overpowered."  However,  it is incumbent  upon  one to 
have his heart burnt  under  the influence  of his Lord's  Promise  and threat;  and 
why not since  he is no more  than a sinful  humiliated  servant,  standing  in front  of 
the Compeller  Irresistible  Lord?
Those  meanings  vary (from  one to another)  in accordance  with the degrees  of 
understanding;  and the degrees  of understanding  differ  in accordance  with the 
degrees  of knowledge  availability  and heart pureness;  and of a surety,  such  
degrees  are beyond  any calculation.  Furthermore,  prayer  is the key of hearts,  in 
which  the mysteries  of words  are disclosed.  This is the right of recitation,  and it 
implies  also both  Adhkar  (celebrations)  and Tasbihs  (Exaltations  ).
Therefore,  let him observe  the tranquility  of reverence  in his reading:  he 
should  recite the Qur ’an in slow, measured  rhythmic  tones,  and not by way of 
narration,  for this is easier  and more fitting  for reflection  and consideration.  He 
should  differentiate  in his tones  between  the Holy  Verses  of mercy,  for example,  
and those  of punishment,  those  of promise  and those  of threat,  those  of Tahmid  
and those  of Tasbih.  It is narrated  that it was the habit  of An-Nakh'i,  whenever323
!


Page 326:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
came  upon  Allah's  statement:  "No son did Allah  beget,  nor is there  any god along  
with Him"  (Ad-Mu'minun  91)324
4 (jfj) cr? ^3 $3 cr? ^ ^ £
To lower  his tone as if he felt shy of making  a mention  of anything  that is not 
consonant  with the majesty  of Allah Almighty.  It is narrated  (by both Abu  
Dawud  and At-Tirmidhi  on the authority  of Abdullah  Ibn Umar) that the 
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "(On the Day of Judgement)  it 
will be said to the Qur'an  reciter:  "Read  and raise up (in degrees),  and recite  in a 
slow rhythmic  tones  in the same  way as you used to recite  in the world  (and you 
will be raised  a degree  higher  for each Holy  Verse  you recite)."
The continual  standing  (during  the prayer)  draws  attention  to the necessity  of 
keeping  the heart  present  with Allah  Almighty  in one state of attentiveness.  (It is 
narrated  by Abu Dawud,  An-Nasa'i  and Al-Hakim  on the authority  of Abu Dharr  
that the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him")  said: "Allah  turns  His Face to 
the praying  man as long as he does not turn sideways  (in his prayer)."  As well as 
both head and eyes should  be guarded  from  turning  sideways,  the innermost  also 
should  be well-guarded  from  turning  (to anything  else) other  than the prayer.  But 
in case it turns to anything  else other than the prayer,  you should  soon remind  
him of Allah's  watching  him, and the malevolence  of dealing  slightly  with the 
private  discourse  shown  from the heedlessness  during  such discourse,  that it 
should  be attentive  once  again.
On the other  hand, you should  adhere  to the submission  of the heart, for 
indeed,  the salvation  from turning  sideways  in the prayer,  outwardly  and 
inwardly  is the fruit of submission;  and the submission  of one's  inward  leads to 
the submission  of his outward.  For this reason  when the Messenger  of Allah  
"Peace  be upon him" (according  to an unidentified  narration)  saw a man  
playing  with his beard  while being  in prayer,  he said: "As for that man, if his 
heart  proves  submissive,  of a surety,  his organs  would  become  submissive;  and 
that's  because  the wards  always  follow  the guardian."  For this reason,  it is said 
in the following  supplication:  "O Allah! Amend  both the guardian  and the 
subjects",  i.e. the heart and the organs.  It is narrated  that Abu Bakr As-Siddiq  
"Allah  be pleased  with him" used to be as firm as a wedge,  and Ibn Az-Zubair  
as stable as a wood stick in prayer.  One of the righteous  also used to be so 
much still in his bowing  that the birds might  stand on his back as if he were  
something  solid.
If doing  all of that is required,  by nature,  from him who stands  in front  of an 
exalted  person  from  amongst  the inhabitants  of this world,  why should  it not be 
done by him when  he stands  in front of the King  of all kings,  particularly  if he 
does know Who is the King of all kings?  To be sure, it is out of failure of 
acquaintance  with the Glory  and Majesty  of Allah Almighty,  as well as of His 
Watching  over the inward  and conscience  of a man to be firm and constant  while  
standing  in front  of anyone  (other  than Allah)  out of submissiveness,  and at the


Page 327:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer
same time, be mischievous,  with his organs  and parts of body moving  while  
standing  in front of Allah  Almighty  (in prayer).  In comment  on Allah ’s saying:  " 
Who  sees you standing  forth (in prayer),  And your movements  among  those  who  
prostrate  themselves"  (Ash-Shu'ara'  218:219)
i -'3 <j dlTiij  <25 (jJu dXj^> c£oJl $
"It implies  one's  standing,  bowing,  prostration  and sitting."
In bowing  and prostration,  you should  celebrate  once again the Magnificence  
of Allah  Almighty,  and raise your hands  seeking  shelter  from the punishment  of 
Allah Almighty  with His forgiveness  and pardon,  renewing  your intent and 
following  the right way of the Prophet  "Peace  be upon him", resuming  your  
humility  and passivity  to Him through  bowing,  endeavouring  to smooth  your  
heart, refurbish  your submission,  and feel your subjection  in relation  to the 
Power  and Honour  of your Lord, your humbleness  in comparison  with the 
Supremacy  and Loftiness  of your Lord,  seeking  the confirmation  of that in your  
heart  with your tongue,  through  exalting  your Lord,  and bearing  witness  to His 
Greatness  and to the fact that He is the Greatest  of all who are great,  repeating  
that in your heart,  by way of assurance.
Then,  you should  raise from the posture  of bowing,  hoping  that He Almighty  
would  bestow  mercy  upon  you, affirming  that in yourself  by saying:  "Allah  hears  
such as sends praises  to Him",  i.e. that He Almighty  responds  to such as gives  
thanks  to Him. Then,  carry  on that praise  which  necessitates  more  by saying:  "O 
our Lord!  To You be the praise",  augmenting  it by the supplementary  phrase:  "as 
much  as to fill both the heavens  and the earth",  after which  you should  fall in 
prostration,  which  is the highest  degree  of submission  and compliance,  in which  
you place firm your face, the most  valuable  of your organs  in the earth,  one of 
the most  degraded  things.  If you are able not to make  anything  between  your face 
and the earth,  you should  do, for it will be more  submissive  and subservient.  You  
should  know  that if you put yourself  to humiliation,  you will have  located  it in its 
right place,  and restored  the offshoot  to its origin,  for it is from earth that you 
have been created,  and to which  you should  return.
At that moment,  refresh  in your heart the Greatness  and Magnificence  of 
Allah Almighty  by saying  Exalted  be He, Most High",  which  you should  repeat  
many  times,  since the single  utterance  always  has no strong  influence.  Once  your  
heart becomes  apparendy  smooth,  you should  give trust to Allah's  Mercy,  since  
Allah  Almighty  hastens  to bestow  His Mercy  upon die weak  and humiliated  and 
not to the arrogant  and haughty.  Then,  raise your  head while  glorifying  Allah,  and 
asking  Him for your need, saying:  "O my Lord! Forgive  me and bestow  Your  
mercy  upon me, and excuse  me for (such of sins as) You know",  or such of 
supplications  as you like. Then, affirm your humility  by way of repetition,  
through  returning  to the prostration  posture  once  again.
When  you sit for testification  (Tashahhud),  be courteous  in your sitting,  and 
declare  that what you are going to state of prayers  and good things,  i.e. all of 
good  and pure manners  and complements  i.e. all dominion  are to Allah  Almighty.325


Page 328:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
Fill your heart  with the presence  of the Prophet  "Peace  be upon him" and his 
generous  and honoured  person,  saying:  "Peace,  Allah's  Mercy  and Blessing  be 
upon  you O Prophet",  and rest assured  of the fact that your  greeting  reaches  him,  
and that he return  the salutation  to you with what is much better.  Then,  pay 
salutation  to yourself  as well as to all of Allah's  righteous  good servants,  with  
great  expectation  from  Allah  Almighty  to return  such greeting  to you as much  as 
is the number  of His righteous  good  servants.
After that, bear testimony  to Allah's  Oneness,  and to the Apostleship  of 
Muhammad,  His Prophet  "Peace  be upon  him" (through  the statement:  "There  is 
no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah,  and that Muhammad  is His Messenger"),  in 
restitution  of Allah's Covenant,  by repeating  both statements  of testimony,  
therewith  you seek protection  (from polytheism).  At the conclusion  of your  
prayer,  supplicate  with the famous  supplication,  showing  humility,  submission,  
imploration  and invocation,  having  the trust that you will receive  answer.  Let 
your supplication  include  your parents  and all of the faithful  believers.  Aim,  with  
your end salutation,  to greet  the angels  and all the attendants,  and then intend  to 
finish  your prayer  with it, giving  thanks  to Allah  Almighty  Who has helped  you 
fulfill  this religious  service,  having  the impression  that with this prayer  of yours,  
you are going  to leave (this world)  and that you might  not live to offer  the like of326
it
In this connection  (it is narrated  that) he "Peace  be upon  him" said to him 
whom  he was giving  advice:  "Offer  a prayer  of a man who is going  to leave  (this  
world)."  Then,  bring in your heart the feeling  of shyness  and indulgence,  for 
fear your prayer  might  not be accepted,  and rather  be rejected  in view of an 
evident  or a hidden  sin, with the result  that it might  be returned  back in your  
face, expecting,  in spite of that, from Him to accept  it, out of His Generosity,  
Bounty  and Grace.  It was the habit of Yahya  Ibn Waththab,  whenever  he 
offered  prayer,  to stay as long as Allah  willed  for him to stay, during  which  the 
(signs  of the) grief  of prayer  would  be visible  on him. Ibrahim  also used to stay 
for an hour after the prayer  (in the state of sadness  and anxiety)  as if he were  
sick.
This is, in detail, the way of the prayer of the submissive,  who humble  
themselves  in their prayers,  who (strictly)  guard  their prayers,  who perform  their  
(obligatory)  prayers  regularly,  and who privately  talk to Allah Almighty  in their  
prayer  as much as is within  the power  of their worship.  Let, therefore,  man  
examine  himself  in relation  to this prayer,  and rejoice  with what has been made  
easy for him and grieve for what escapes  him from it, and endeavour  to 
recompense  it
But as for the prayer  of the heedless,  it leads to danger,  unless  Allah  Almighty  
covers  them  with His Mercy;  and of a surety,  Allah's  Mercy  is all-embracing,  and 
His Generosity  is encompassing.  So, we ask Allah  Almighty  to cover  us with His 
Mercy,  and comprehend  us with His Forgiveness,  since  there  is no way for us but 
to declare  our failure  to fulfill the religious  service  in obedience  of Him as it 
should  be.


Page 329:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer
Taking  from that, it should  be known  that to remove  the defects  from the 
prayer,  be sincere  in offering  it for the Sake of the Countenance  of Allah  
Almighty,  and fulfill it in accordance  with the internal  conditions  which  we've  
mentioned,  such as submissiveness,  exaltation,  shyness,  etc, result  in producing  
lights  in the heart,  which  act as main  keys to all sciences  of Revelation.  It is in the 
prayer  in general,  and during  prostration  in particular,  that the dominion  of both  
the heavens  and the earth is disclosed  to Allah's  nearest  devotees,  where the 
servant  becomes  at the nearest  position  from the Presence  of his Lord Almighty.  
For this reason,  He Almighty  says: "And fall in prostration,  and draw yourself  
near (unto  Me)."  (Al-Alaq  19)327
But the disclosure  granted  to every  prayer  varies  in accordance  with the degree  
of his purification  from the impurities  of this world.
This difference  varies in relation  to strength  and weakness,  muchness  and 
littleness,  and clearness  and vagueness:  such disclosure  might  be of a certain  thing  
with its reality  to one of them,  or with its similitude  to another,  just as the world  
was disclosed  to one of them  in the form  of carcass,  and the devil  in the form  of 
a dog lying on and inviting  men to it. furthermore,  it differs also with the 
difference  of the object  of disclosure,  which  might  be of the attributes  and glory  
of Allah Almighty  to some of them, of His Acts to many of them, or of the 
subtleties  of the sciences  of practical  religion  to others,  on the other  hand, the 
reasons  by which  those  meanings  and concepts  are determined  at every  time are 
ambiguous  and beyond  calculation,  the most convenient  of which is one's  
enterprise.  The more one's effort  is devoted  to a certain  thing, the more it is 
ready  to be disclosed  to him.
But, since those things  could  hardly  be visible  except  through  elegant  mirror,  
and since all mirrors  (of people)  are rusty, which  hindered  them from being  
guided  (to such revelation),  not because  of any niggardliness  on the part of the 
Bestower  of guidance,  but because  of the grave  rust accumulated  on the outfall  of 
guidance,  the people  hastened  to deny such facts. However,  the disposition  is 
accustomed  to reject what is not feasibly  present;  and were a fetus to have a 
mind,  surely,  it would  have denied  the possible  existence  of man at liberty  of air, 
and were a child to have the faculty  of discernment,  he would  have denied  such  
dominion  of both the heavens  and the earth  as the wise men pretend  to perceive.  
This is the case of man in each  phase  of his life, whose  custom  is to reject  what  is 
beyond  him. He who rejects  the stage  of sainthood  should  have then rejected  the 
stage  of Prophethood.
Of a surety,  the people  have been created  in diverse  stages  (to come  one after  
the other).  So, it is not fitting  for anyone  of those  of a certain  stage  to reject  what  
is beyond  his phase.  It is true that when they sought  after that matter  through  
argumentation  and debate,  and not through  purifying  the hearts from anything  
other than Allah Almighty,  they lost it, and thus they came to reject  it. But, he 
who does not belong  to the people  who are granted  the privilege  of disclosure,


Page 330:
328 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
should,  at least, have trust and believe  in the unseen  until it becomes  visible  to 
him through  evidence.
According  to a certain  narration:  ’’When  a servant  stands  to offer  prayer,  Allah  
Almighty  lifts the veil between  Him and His servant,  and turns His Face towards  
him, and the angels  stand  with his prayer,  from his shoulders  up to the sky, and 
say "Amen"  in response  to his supplication;  and all of kindness  is spread  over the 
praying  man from the midst  of the sky down  to the parting  of his head; and a 
caller  pronounces  from  heaven:  "If this who is talking  privately  (to his Lord)  is to 
know,  he would  never  turn away  (from  his prayer).  Undoubtedly,  the gates  of the 
heaven  are opened  to the praying  men, and Allah Almighty  shows  pride to His 
angels  because  of His praying  servant."  Of a surety,  opening  the gates of the 
heaven,  and Allah's  facing  him act as metonymy  of the disclosure  which  we've  
mentioned.
The following  is written  in the Torah:  "O son of Adam!  Fail not to stand in 
front of Me weeping  in prayer,  for I'm Allah,  Who has drawn  unto your heart,  
and through  the unseen  you have seen My Light. "According  to another:  "We  
came  to see that such smoothness,  weeping  and expansions  which  one might  find 
in his heart resulted  from the Lord's  Nearness  to the heart."  If this nearness  is 
not spatial,  there is no meaning  to it unless  it is through  guidance,  mercy  and 
removing  the veil. It is said that when  one offers  a two-rak'ah  prayer,  two rows  of 
angels  appreciate  him, each containing  ten thousand,  and Allah  Almighty  shows  
pride to one hundred  thousand  angels because  of him. This is because  the 
praying  man joins in his prayer  standing  and sitting,  bowing  and prostration,  
which  Allah  Almighty  has distributed  among  forty  thousand  angels,  in such a way 
that these  in the posture  of standing  will keep themselves  in that posture  and will 
never  bow until the Day of Judgement,  and these in the posture  of prostration  
will keep themselves  as such and will never  raise from prostration  until the Day  
of  Judgement,  and the same  is true of those  in the postures  of bowing  and sitting.
Such nearness  and closeness  as granted  to the angels  are unchangeable  in the 
same state,  with neither  increase  nor decrease.  For this reason,  Allah tells about  
them  in His Saying  on their tongue:  "And  there  is none  among  us but that he has 
a well-known  station."  (As-Saffat  164)
But man differs  from angels  in the matter  of promotion  in degrees,  which  
enables  him to advance  in closeness  and nearness  unto the Presence  of Allah  
Almighty;  and such gate of advance  is closed  before  the angels  "Peace  be upon  
them",  for each of them  has no more  than his rank  which  is unique  to him, and 
his religious  service  in which  he is engaged,  from which  he never  moves  nor 
weakens  (in his service):  they are "those  who are in His (very)  Presence  are not 
too proud to serve Him, Nor are they (ever) weary (of His service):  They  
celebrate  His praises  night and day, nor do they ever flag or intermit."  (Al- 
Anbiya  19:20)


Page 331:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer
4 (®* <jc-h ^
The prayer  is the key to attain  more  degrees,  in accordance  with the statement  
of Allah  Almighty:  "Prosperous  are the faithful  believers,  who humble  themselves  
in their prayers."  (Al-Mu'minun  1:2)
^ © Oy*-r^~  Jj p-* © O>rf3-**L  ^ ^
After He ascribes  faith to them, He praises  them with particular  prayer  in 
which  they are submissive.  He concludes  the characteristics  of the prosperous  
with that of the prayer:  "And who strictly  guard  their prayers."  In definition  of 
the fruit of these characteristics,  He says: "Those  are the heirs,  who shall inherit  
Paradise  in which  they will abide  forever."  Thus  he ascribes  prosperity  to them in 
the beginning,  and describes  them  as the would-be  heirs  of Paradise  in the end.
In my sight, this is the limit, at which both nonsense  of speech and 
heedlessncss  of the heart stops. For this reason,  Allah Almighty  says in 
description  of their (the faithful  believers')  opposite:  "'What  has led you to enter  
Saqar  (one of the names  given  to the fire of Hell)?'  they shall say: 'We were not of 
the praying  men."'  The praying  men then are those who shall inherit  Paradise,  
and witness  (with their sights) the Light of Allah Almighty,  and enjoy of His 
Closeness  and Nearness  unto their hearts:  we ask Allah  Almighty  to include  us in 
them, and seek refuge with Him from the punishment  of him, of flowery  
discourse  and evil deed;  He is Most  Generous,  Most  Bountiful,  Ever-Beneficent;  
and Allah's  Blessing  and Peace  be upon  every  well-chosen  servant.
Stories  And News  About  The Prayer  Of The Submissive  Hen
It should  be known  that submission  is the fruit of belief,  and the result of 
certainty  of faith in the Glory  and Majesty  of Allah Almighty.  So, he who has 
been granted  this privilege,  will be submissive  not only in prayer,  but also in 
anything  else, even in his solitude,  in the treasury  to fulfill his need. However,  
submission  is assured  by one's  knowledge  of Allah's  watching  him in all his states,  
of Allah's  Glory  and Majesty,  and of the servant's  indulgence  (in fulfilling  what  is 
due upon him as it should  be). It is from those kinds of knowledge  that 
submission  is produced.  It is not unique  only to prayer.
For this reason,  it is narrated  that one (of the righteous  submissive)  did not 
raise his head up to the sky for as many  as forty years out of his feeling  shy of 
and submission  to Allah  Almighty.  It was the habit  of Ar-Rabie  Ibn Khaitham  to 
lower  his gaze and turn down  his head out of submission  so much  that he was 
thought  to have been blind.  He used to visit Ibn Mas'ud  for twenty  years,  during  
which  whenever  his (Ibn Mas'ud's)  slave-girl  saw him, she would  say: "Your  blind  
friend has come."  Ibn Mas'ud  used to laugh for her statement.  Whenever  he 
knocked  at the door, the slave-girl  of Ibn Mas'ud  would  come out and see him 
having  gazed  his sight  and turned  down  his head.  Whenever  Ibn Mas'ud  saw him 
(in such a state)  he would  say to him: "Behold!  Give  the glad tidings  to those  who329


Page 332:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 330
are devoutly  obedient.  Had Muhammad  "Peace  be upon  him" seen you, he would  
have rejoiced  with you (or according  to another  narration,  he would  have loved  
you, or according  to a third narration,  he would  have smiled  because  of his 
pleasure  with  you)."
One day, he was walking  in the company  of Ibn Mas'ud  in the market  of 
smiths,  when  he saw their furnaces  being  blown  and the fires flamed,  thereupon  
he swooned  and fell unconscious.  Ibn Mas'ud  sat by his head until the time of 
prayer  was due, but he did not recover.  Ibn Mas'ud  carried  him on his back and 
went  home.  He kept unconscious  until the same hour (of the next day) in which  
he fell unconscious,  with the result that five (obligatory)  prayers  escaped  him,  
during  which  Ibn Mas'ud  was still sitting  by his head, saying:  "This,  by Allah,  is 
the fear." Ar-Rabie  used to say: "Nothing  concerned  me in any prayer  I entered  
but what  I was saying,  and what  was being  said to me."
Abdullah  Ibn Amir  was from  among  the submissive  who humbled  themselves  
in their prayer:  whenever  he was praying  and even his daughter  beat the 
tambourine  and the women  went  on talking  about  what they liked in the house,  
he would  make  no sense  nor hearing  to that. Once  he was asked:  "Does  your self 
not suggest  to you any thoughts  in the prayer?"  he said: "Yes:  it suggests  to me to 
think of my standing  in front of Allah Almighty,  and of my position  in the 
hereafter  abode."  It was said to him: "Then,  do you experience  such of the 
matters  and affairs  of this world  as we experience  (in prayer)?"  on that he said:  
"To have the teeth enter  into my body  one after the other  is much  better  for me 
than to experience  in my prayer  the like of what  you experience."  He said: "Even  
had the veil been  removed,  my certainty  (of faith)  would  have  increased  no more"  
(because  he attained  the highest  peak of certainty  after  which  he is not in need of 
any more).
Muslim  Ibn Yasar  was one of these who used to prove submissive  in the 
prayer.  We narrated  earlier  that he made  no sense  to the collapse  of the pillar  in 
one side of the mosque  where  he was praying.
One of those submissive  had one of his limbs eroded,  and there was no 
remedy  but to be cut off. It was said: "In prayer,  he feels not of what would  
happen  to him."  On that it was cut off while  he was in prayer.
One of them said: "The prayer  belongs  to the hereafter;  and once you enter  
into it, you will have come out of this world."  One of them was asked:  "Does  
your own self suggest  to you any thoughts  about  the matters  of this world in 
prayer?"  he said: "Not  in the prayer  nor in anything  else."  Another  one was asked:  
"Do you remember  anything  in the prayer?"  he said: "Is there anything  much  
dearer  to me than prayer so that I would remember  it during  the prayer?"  
according  to Abu Ad-Darda'  "Allah  be pleased  with him" said: "It is out of one's  
good understanding  or religion  to begin with fulfilling  his need before  prayer,  
perchance  he would  enter  the prayer  with his heart  pure and clean  (from  anything  
else)."
One of them also used to make short the prayer  for fear of having  evil 
suggestions  during  it. it is narrated  (by Ahmad)  that Ammar  Ibn Yasir  offered  a


Page 333:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
prayer  which  he made short,  thereupon  it was said to him: "You've  made short  
this prayer  O Abu Al-Yaqdhan!"  on that he said: "Have you seen that I've 
reduced  anything  from its pillars and limits?"  they answered  in the negative,  
thereupon  he said: "Indeed,  I've hastened  to (finish  before  being  vulnerable  to) 
the forgetfulness  caused  by Satan."  He further  said: The Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "A servant  might  offer a prayer,  
and even no more than its half, one-third,  one-fourth,  one-fifth,  one-sixth,  or 
even one-tenth  would be written  for him." According  to another  narration:  
"Nothing  will be written  for a servant  from his prayer  more  than that to which  he 
makes  sense."
It is narrated  that Talhah,  Az-Zubair  and a group  of the holy  companions  used  
to make  short  their prayers  most  and they said in justification  of that: "We hasten  
to (finish  it before)  Satan's  evil suggestions."  It is narrated  that Umar Ibn Al- 
Khattab  said from over the pulpit:  "Verily,  a man might  have the hair of both  
sides of his head grow  hoary  (out of old age) while  being  a Muslim,  even though  
he has never  perfected  a single  prayer  to be offered  for the Sake of Allah."  They  
asked: "What  is the reason?"  he said: "He never perfects  its submission  and 
humbleness,  nor does he turn his face to Allah  Almighty  wholeheartedly  therein."
Abu Al-Aliyah  said, in reply to the question  about the meaning  of Allah's  
saying:  " Who are neglectful  of their Prayers":  "They  are those  who are forgetful  
during  their prayer  so much that they do not know  whether  with odd or even  
number  of rak'ahs  they finish  it." but according  to Al-Hassan  "It applies  to him,  
who wastes  the time of the prayer  until it elapses."  According  to another:  "It 
implies  him, who will not rejoice if he offers the obligatory  prayer at the 
beginning  of its time, nor will he grieve  if he prays it at the end of the time, in 
other  words,  he sees no good in hastening  on to pray it, nor sin in delaying  to 
pray  it."
It should  be known  that only a portion  of the prayer  might  be counted  and 
written  on the exclusion  of another,  as attested  by man narrations.  But in the 
opinion  of the jurisprudents,  the validity  of the prayer  could  hardly  be divisible.  
Yet, this means  something  different  which  we've  mentioned  earlier.  This meaning  
is confirmed  by many  Prophetic  traditions.  It is narrated  (by the men of Sunan,  
and Al-Hakim  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah),  for example,  that the reduction  
of the obligatory  prayers  will be compensated  for by the supererogatory  prayers.  
According  to the Prophet  Jesus  "Peace  be upon  him",  Allah Almighty  says: "It is 
with the help of the obligatory  deeds that My servant  is saved from My 
punishment;  but it is with the help of the supererogatory  deeds that he draws  
near unto Me." (It is narrated  that) the Prophet  "Peace  be upon  him" said: Allah  
Almighty  says: "My servant  will not be saved from My punishment  but after  
fulfilling  what  I enjoined  upon  him."
It is narrated  (by Ad-Dailami  on the authority  of Ubai Ibn Ka'b and An- 
Nasa'i  on the authority  of Abd Ar-Rahman  Ibn Abza  that) once,  the Messenger  
of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" offered  prayer  in which  he 
forgot  a Holy Verse from his recitation.  When  he turned  away he asked the331


Page 334:
332 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
people:  "What  have I recited  (in the prayer)?"  the people  gave no reply. He 
asked  Ubai Ibn Ka'b "Allah  be pleased  with him" thereupon  he said: "You've  
recited  such and such a Surah,  and forgotten  such and such a Verse therein:  
however,  we do not know  whether  it has been abrogated  or taken away."  He 
"Peace be upon him" said: "You are fitting for such (awareness  and 
attentiveness)  O Ubai!"  then he faced the others  and said: "What  is the matter  
with a people  who attend  the prayer  (in congregation)  and complete  their rows,  
and their Prophet  is in front  of them,  even though  they do not know  what  he is 
reciting  to them (in prayer)  from the Book of their Lord?  Behold!  When  the 
children  of Israel  did the same,  Allah  Almighty  revealed  to their Prophet  to say 
to his people:  "Do you attend  with Me only with your bodies  and give me your  
tongues,  even though  you make your hearts absent  from Me? False is that 
which  you do!"
This signifies  the fact that paying  attention  to, and understanding  what the 
imam  is reciting  in the prayer  is equal  to one's  reciting  by himself.  According  to a 
learned  man: "One  of them might  perform  a single  prostration,  thinking  that he 
has approached  the Presence  of Allah  with it, even though  if his sins therein  has 
been distributed  among  the inhabitants  of a town,  they would  ruin (because  of 
their abundance)."  He was asked:  "How  is that?"  he said: "He is prostration  (and  
supposed  to be) in the Presence  of Allah Almighty,  even though  his heart is 
engaged  in a worldly  passion  and in the state of contemplation  of an internal  
thought  which  has prevailed  over himself."
This is, therefore,  the way of submission  in prayer.  However,  all of those  
tales and narrations,  besides  what  we've  mentioned  earlier  in this context,  prove  
that the fundament  on which  the prayer  is based  is submission  which  requires  
the attentiveness  of the heart, and that only the movements  and acts with  
heedlessness  are of no use at all, particularly  at the appointed  time (of the 
hereafter);  and Allah  Almighty  knows  best: we ask Allah Almighty  to grant  us 
good  success.
CHAPTER  FOUR:  ON IMAMATE  AND EMULATION
The pillars  of the prayer;  after the end salutation;  the imam's  duties  before  
prayer;  and pertaining  to recitation
The imam's  duties  before  the Prayer
There  are six duties  which  are incumbent  upon the imam  to observe  before  
the prayer:
The first duty: He should  not move  forward  to lead in prayer  a people  who  
dislike  him. If they differ  (as to who should  lead them),  let them  choose  from the 
majority:  if those of good and faith are a few in number,  it will be better  to 
choose  from  them,  according  to the narration  (of At-Tirmidhi  on the authority  of 
Abu Umamah  the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said): "There  are 
three, whose  prayer  never goes beyond  their heads: the errant  slave, the wife  
whose  husband  is angry  with her, and the imam  who leads a people  even though  
they are displeased  with him."


Page 335:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer
As well as it is forbidden  for one to come  forward  to lead a people  who have  
aversion  towards  him, it is also forbidden  for him to come forward  to act as an 
imam  of one who is more  learned  and well-versed  in religion  than him, unless  the 
latter  himself  refrains  from leading  the prayer;  and in this case, it is possible  for 
the former  to lead the prayer.  Apart  from that, let him move  forward  to lead the 
prayer  once he comes,  and knows  in himself  the capability  of undertaking  all 
conditions  of imamate.  At that point,  it is undesirable  to push  one another  to take 
up the imamate,  for it is said that a people  pushed  each other for the imamate  
after they had established  the prayer,  thereupon  the earth was made to swallow  
them.333
Pertaining  to the reports  which tell that the holy companions  "Allah be 
pleased  with them"  used to push one another  to take up the imamate,  they did so 
for they always  were in the habit of giving  preference  to whom  they thought  to 
be superior  and more fitting for that, or out of their fear for themselves  the 
possibility  of forgetfulness,  or the danger  of the surety  of their  prayer,  for, as it is 
well-known,  the imams  should  act as guarantors  (of the prayer);  and it seemed  as 
if he who was not accustomed  to take on imamate  might  be engaged  in anything  
else, with the result  that he would  be put to trouble  of doubting  his sincerity  in 
prayer,  out of his feeling  shy of those  who were praying  behind  him, particularly  
if he was to recite  aloud  in prayer;  and this was the main  cause  of their  refraining  
from  the imamate.
The second  duty: If one is given the freedom  to choose  whether  to 
pronounce  the Call to prayer  (Adhan)  or to lead the prayer,  let him choose  to 
pronounce  Adhan.  It is true that each has its excellence,  but it is undesirable  to 
combine  both.  The imam  should  be someone  else other  than the Mu'adhdhin.  
However,  if combining  both is difficult,  the imamate  should  be better.  But the 
Adhan  is thought  to be better  according  to somebody,  in view of the narradon  
which we've transmitted  pertaining  to its excellence,  in addition  to (the 
narration  of Abu Dawud  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  in which)  the 
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: “The imam  
is responsible  (for such as praying  behind him), and the Mu ’adhdhin  is 
trustworthy:  O Allah!  give guidance  to the imams  and bestow  forgiveness  upon  
the Mu’adhdhins. ” In comment  on that they said: "The  imamate  implies  the risk 
of surety."
(According  to another  narration  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah)  the 
Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "Verily,  the imam  is a trustworthy:  
bow yourselves  when  he bows,  and prostrate  when  he prostrates."  (According  to 
the narration  of Abu Dawud  on the authority  of Uqbah  Ibn Amir,  and that of Al- 
Bukhari  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah,  the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be 
upon  him")  said: "If he perfects  (his prayer)  the (benefit)  will be for both him and 
you; and if he reduces  (anything  from the prayer)  the (harm)  will be upon him 
and not upon  you." He further  said (according  to the narration  of Abu Dawud):  
"O Allah! give guidance  to the imams and bestow  forgiveness  upon the 
Mu ’adhdhins. ” Of a surety,  forgiveness  is more fitting  to be sought  and askedi


Page 336:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
for, since guidance  is sought  for to lead to forgiveness.  According  to the 
narration  (of both At-Tirmidhi  and Ibn Majah  on the authority  of Ibn Abbas)  he 
said: "He, who keeps pronouncing  Adhan  in a mosque  for seven years, the 
Garden  will be assured  to him with no accounting;  and he, who keeps  
pronouncing  Adhan  (in a mosque)  for forty  years,  will be admitted  to the Garden  
immediately  with no reckoning."  For this reason,  the reports  show  that the holy  
companions  "Allah  be pleased  with them"  used to push one another  to take on 
the imamate.
But what is more right is that the imamate  is much better since the 
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" kept taking  it on 
(until  he grew  fatally  ill), and so did both  Abu Bakr  and Umar  "Allah  be pleased  
with them"  and the rightly-guided  rulers  after them,  it is true that it has the risk 
of surety,  but even the excellence  with risk is much better,  in the same way as 
ruling is, in view of the statement  of the Prophet  "Peace be upon him"  
(according  to the narration  of At-Tabarani  on the authority  of Ibn Abbas):  "A 
single  day from a just ruler is much  better  than the religious  service  of seventy  
years."  But it has risk.
For this reason,  the best and the most learned  in religion  should  be brought  
forward  (to lead the prayer),  depending  upon (the narration  of both Ad- 
Daraqatni  and Al-Baihaqi  on the authority  of Ibn Umar,  in which)  the Messenger  
of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "Your  imams  will be your intercessors  or 
your  delegate  to Allah.  So, if you like to purify  your  prayer,  bring  forward  the best  
among  you (to lead the prayer)."  According  to an early  righteous  man: "After  the 
Prophets,  there is none better  than the learned  men of knowledge,  and after the 
learned  men of knowledge,  there is none better  than the praying  imams;  and 
that's because  all have stood in front of Allah Almighty  and ahead of His 
creatures  (as their leaders,  teachers  and intercessors),  through  Prophethood,  
knowledge  and the fundament  of religion,  i.e. the prayer."
Depending  upon this argument,  the holy companions  brought  Abu Bakr As- 
Siddiq forward  to be ruler over them, saying: "We consider  the matter  and 
behold!  The prayer  is the support  pillar  of religion,  and thus we've  chosen  for our 
worldly  affairs  him whom  the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" accepted  
for the matters  of our religion."  They  did not bring  forward  Bilal (to take on this 
job instead)  under  claim that the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" had 
brought  him forward  to pronounce  the Adhan.  But one might  drive  the narration  
(of Al-Aqili  on the authority  of Ibn Abbas)  in which the Messenger  of Allah  
"Peace  be upon  him" said to a man in reply  to his saying:  "O Messenger  of Allah!  
Guide  me to a deed therewith  I will enter the Garden".  He said: "Act as a 
Mu'adhdhin."  He said: "I could  not do that."  He said: "Then,  act as an imam."  He 
said: "I could  not do so." He said: "Then,  keep praying  behind  an imam  (i.e. keep  
performing  prayer  in congregation)."  Perhaps,  it is argued,  he (guided  him to act 
as a Mu'adhdhin  before  telling  him to be an imam  because  he) thought  that his 
imamate  might  not be accepted  (by the people),  since the Adhan  returns  to him 
individually,  whereas  the imam should  be accepted  by those who are praying334


Page 337:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer
behind  him in congregation,  who should  bring  him forward  (to lead the prayer,  in 
order  that his imamate  would  be held valid);  and after that, he thought  that he 
might  be able to do it.
The third duty: the imam should  observe  the prescribed  fixed time of the 
prayers,  and perform  the (obligatory)  prayers  at the earliest  portion  of the due 
time, in order to attain the Good Pleasure  of Allah Almighty.  To be sure, the 
superiority  of the first portion  of the prayer's  due time to the last portion  is like 
the superiority  of the hereafter  to this world  (according  to the narration  of Ad- 
Dailami  on the authority  of Ibn Umar).  According  to another  narration  (by Ad- 
Daraqatni  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  
be upon him" said): "A servant  might  offer the prayer  at the last portion  of its 
due time,  and thus it does not escape  him, even though  what  he misses  from  the 
early portion  of its due time is much better  for him than the world  and what it 
contains."
Furthermore,  he should  not delay  the prayer  in expectation  for the increasing  
of the number  of the group.  But let them hasten  to perform  it in order  to attain  
the extra  reward  of the earliest  portion  of its due time,  which  is much  better  than  
the abundance  of the group,  and reciting  the long Surahs.  In this respect,  it was 
said that whenever  (at least) two persons  arrived  (in the mosque)  they would  
(establish  the prayer  and would)  not wait the third, and whenever  four persons  
came  to attend  the funeral  prayer,  they would  (perform  it and would)  not wait the 
fifth.335
(It is narrated  on the authority  of Al-Mughirah  Ibn Shu'bah  that) one day, 
the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  him" delayed  to attend  the Fajr prayer,  
while they were on journey,  because  he was engaged  in (answering  the call of 
nature  and) getting  purified  and performing  ablution.  They did not wait him,  
and rather  brought  Abd Ar-Rahman  Ibn Awf  forward  to lead the prayer.  When  
the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" arrived,  the first rak'ahs  had 
escaped  him. He stood to fulfill it (after finishing  from the prayer).  He (the 
narrator)  said: "We felt it difficult  upon  ourselves,  thereupon  the Messenger  of 
Allah "Peace  be upon  him" said: "You've  done well: as such you should  do (in 
similar  cases)."
(According  to another  narration  on the authority  of Sahl Ibn Sa'd) the 
Messenger  of Allah delayed  to attend Zhuhr  prayer (for he was engaged  in 
making  peace  between  some  people  who fell in dispute  in the farthest  precincts  
of Medina).  When  the prayer  was due, they brought  Abu Bakr forward  to lead the 
prayer.  The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" arrived  
in the mosque  while  Abu Bakr  was leading  the prayer,  and stood  by his side. It is 
not binding  upon  the imam  to wait the Mu'adhdhin.  But it is incumbent  upon  the 
Mu'adhdhin  to wait the imam before  he pronounces  the prayer  establishment;  
and once he comes,  he should  not wait anyone  more.
The fourth  duty: the imam  should  lead the prayer  with faithful  sincerity  to 
Allah  Almighty,  and fulfill  Allah's  Trust  pertaining  to purification,  ablution  and all 
the conditions  of his prayer.  It is out of his sincerity  not to take charge  for his


Page 338:
336 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
leading  the prayer.  (According  to the narration  of the men of Sunan  on the 
authority  of Uthman  Ibn Abu AJ-As)  the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  
him" appointed  Uthman  Ibn Abu Al-As Ath-Thaqafi  as governor  and said to 
him: "Take  a Mu'adhdhin,  who accepts  no charge  for his pronouncing  the Call to 
Prayer."  However,  since the Adhan  (for which  no charge  should  be taken)  is the 
way to prayer,  it is more fitting  to accept  no charge  for leading  it. but if he 
receives  salary from a mosque  which  is a Waqf  in favor of him who leads the 
prayer  therein,  or from the magistrate  or from anyone  else, it will not be judged  
as prohibited;  but rather  it will be undesirable;  and it is well-known  that what is 
undesirable  in relation  to the obligatory  duties  is more  severe  than it is in relation  
to the supererogatory  deeds. But in this case, such charge  should  be for his 
regular  attendance  to the mosque,  and observing  the affairs of the mosque  
pertaining  to the establishment  of the prayer  in congregation,  and not for his 
leading  the prayer  in itself.
The trust requires  one to get purified  inwardly  from lewdness  and major  sins,  
as well as from  insisting  on doing  the minor  sins. He who intends  to be an imam  
should  endeavour  to guard  against  all of that, for he is in the same  position  as a 
delegate  or an intercessor  for the people.  For this reason,  he should  be the best  
of them,  he should  also get clean  outwardly  from  impurities  and filth which  none  
knows  but he. If, during  the prayer,  he remembers  that his ablution  has been  
broken  (and he did not perform  ablution),  or if he makes  wind,  let not him feel 
shy, but rather  let him take hold of the hand of him who is the nearest  to him,  
and make  him his successor  in leading  the prayer.
(According  to the narration  of Abu Dawud  on the authority  of Abu Bakrah)  
once the Messenger  of Allah  remembered,  during  the prayer,  that he was in the 
state of ceremonial  impurity,  thereupon  he made somebody  succeed  him in 
leading  the prayer,  and he went  to take bath after  which  he returned  and entered  
the prayer.  According  to Sufyan:  "You  might  offer  prayer  behind  everyone,  be it 
dutiful  or undutiful,  unless he is not an addict  to wine, nor dissolute,  whose  
wickedness  is open, nor disobedient  to his parents,  nor an innovator  (of a 
heresy),  nor an errant  slave."
The fifth duty:  he should  not pronounce  Takhir  of assuming  the prayer  until  
the rows (of the praying  people)  are straight.  In so doing,  let him turn sideways,  
and in case he finds inconsistency,  let him order  to set it right. It was said that 
they were  in the habit  of standing  in the prayer,  with their shoulders  flanking  each  
other,  and their heels sticking  to one another.  Let not him pronounce  Takhir  of 
assuming  the prayer  until the Mu'adhdhin  finishes  from the prayer  establishment  
(Iqamah).  But the Mu'adhdhin  also should  delay to pronounce  Iqamah  for some  
time after  the Adhan  enough  for the people  to get ready  to offer  prayer.
According  to the narration  (of both At-Tirmidhi  and Al-Hakim  on the 
authority  of Jabir, the Messenger  of Allah said): "Let the Mu'adhdhin  make an 
interval  between  both Adhan  and Iqamah,  much  enough  for him who is eating  to 
finish from his meal, and such as is answering  the call of nature  to finish from  
fulfilling  his need."  That's  because  he forbade  to offer  prayer  while forcing  both


Page 339:
Book  four: The mysteries  and duties  of prayer
wicked  things  (i.e. urine  and excrement,  according  to the narration  of Muslim  on 
the authority  of A'ishah),  as well as he ordered  to start with having  supper  before  
offering  Isha' prayer  (in case the supper  was served  by the time the Isha' prayer  
was established,  according  to the narration  of Al-Bukhari  and others on the 
authority  of both Ibn Umar  and A'ishah),  in fulfillment  of the devotion  of the 
heart.337
The sixth duty: The imam should  raise his voice with the Takbir  of 
assuming  the prayer,  as well as with all the other Takbirs,  unlike  him who  
prays behind  him, who should  not raise his voice no more than enough  to 
enable  him to hear it. let him further  affirm  his intent  to lead the prayer,  in 
order  to attain  the extra  reward  of imamate.  But in case he does not affirm  his 
intent,  his prayer  will be held valid, and so will the prayer  of those praying  
behind  him be, pardcularly  if they affirm  their intent  to follow  the imam,  and 
they will also attain  the extra reward  of following  him, but he will not attain  
the extra reward  of imamate.  Let the one led in prayer  delay his Takbir  until  
the imam  finishes  from  his; and Allah  knows  best.
The Duties  Pertaining  To Recitation
There  are three  dudes  pertaining  to recitadon;  and they go as follows:
The first duty:  The imam  should  read in secrecy  the supplication  of opening  
and seeking  refuge  (with  Allah from Satan),  as if he prays alone,  and then recite  
aloud  Al-Fadhah  and such of Surahs  from the Qur'an  as he likes,  in both rak'ahs  
of Morning  prayer,  the first two of both Maghrib  and Isha' prayers.  This duty is 
also incumbent  upon one praying  alone. Both the imam and one led in prayer  
should  recite  "Amen"  aloud  in the three  prayers  which  require  out loud recitadon.  
The one led in prayer  should  adjust  his "Amen"  to be synchronous  with and not 
after that of the imam.  Let the imam  also recite aloud "In the Name  of Allah,  
Most Gracious,  Most Merciful".  However,  there are opposing  narrations  
concerning  that condition,  but Ash-Shafi'i's  choice supports  the outlawed  
recitation.
The second  duty:  The imam  should  make  three  intervals  during  his standing,  
according  to the narrations  (of Ahmad  and others)  on the authority  of Samurah  
Ibn Jundub  and Imran  Ibn Al-Hussain  from the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be 
upon  him".  The first, which  is the longest,  is after Takbir  of assuming  the prayer,  
i.e. during  his recitation  of the supplication  of opening;  and it should  be long  
enough  for those  led in prayer  to recite  the Opening  of the Book.  But if he does  
not make this interval,  they will not be able to listen to his recitation  (of Al- 
Fatihah  since they will be inclined  to read it with him), and in this case, he will 
carry  the burden  of what  they miss from  their  prayer,  for if they do not recite  Al- 
Fatihah  during  such interval,  and rather  are engaged  in it at any time else, the 
harm  will be against  him and not them.
The second  interval  should  be after finishing  from  Al-Fatihah,  in order  that he 
who has not completed  it in the first interval  should  be able to recite  it in full. It 
should  be equal  in length  to the half  of the first interval.  The third  interval  should


Page 340:
338 The quarter  of the acts of worship
be after his finishing  from reciting  the Surah;  and it is the shortest  of them  all. It 
should  be just enough  for a short  break  between  the recitation  and Takbir,  for it 
is forbidden  to join both.  Let not the one led in prayer  recite  after the imam  but 
Al-Fadhah  (during  the interval).  If the imam  makes  no interval,  let him recite  it 
with him, and in this case, the deficiency  will be on the part of the imam.  
Furthermore,  if the one led in prayer  does not hear in view of his being far 
distant  from  the imam,  or in case he is offering  prayer  which  requires  recitation  in 
a low tone, there will be no blame  upon him to recite the Surah (besides  Al- 
Fatihah).
The third  duty:  Let the imam  recite  in the Morning  prayers  two Surahs  from  
the oft-repeated  long ones,  which  consist  of less than one hundred  Holy  Verses,  
since  it is out of the sunnah  to prolong  recitation  and offer  it when  it is very dark,  
and no harm  will he receive  if he finishes  from  it when  the morning  has become  
very clear.  There  is no blame  upon  him to recite  in the second  rak'ah  as much  as 
nearly  twenty  or thirty  Holy  Verses  from the last portion  of the long Surah  to its 
conclusion,  for that rarely  occurs  to hearings  which  makes  it more ready  to give  
admonition  and stimulate  consideration.  Some learned  men do not like the 
recitation  from the beginning  of the long Surahs since it might lead to 
interrupting  them.
It is narrated  (by Muslim  on the authority  of Abdullah  Ibn As-Sa'ib)  that the 
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" recited  a portion  of the Surah of 
Yunus,  and when  he reached  the mention  of Moses  and Pharaoh,  he interrupted  
the recitation  and went on bowing.  It is further  narrated  (by Muslim  on the 
authority  of Ibn Abbas)  that he "Peace  be upon  him" recited  in the first rak'ah  of 
Fajr prayer  a Holy Verse from the Surah of Al-Baqarah,  i.e. His saying:  "Say  
We've  believed  in Allah and in what has been revealed  to us...'" and in the 
second:  "O our Lord!  We believed  in what  You have revealed..."  (According  to 
the narration  of Abu Dawud  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah)  he heard Bilal  
reciting  a portion  from there and a portion  from here, and when  he asked  him 
about  that he said: "I join what it good with its like." He said to him: "You've  
done  well."
In Zhuhr  prayer,  let him recite  the long Surahs  from amongst  the Mufassal,  
up to nearly  thirty Holy Verses,  and half of that in Asr prayer,  and the last 
Surahs  from amongst  the Mufassal  in Maghrib  prayer.  The Messenger  of Allah  
"Peace  be upon  him" recited  the Surah  of Al-Mursalat  in Maghrib  prayer  which  
he offered  for the last time after  which  he was not seen to have offered  prayer  
(in congregation)  until he died. In short,  it is better  to make short the prayer,  
particularly  when the group of the praying  people  are great in number.  In 
confirmation  of this concession,  the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him"  
said: "When  anyone  of you leads the people  in prayer,  let him make short the 
prayer,  for among  them,  there is the weak,  the old, and the one who has a need  
which  he wishes  to fulfill;  and when  he prays  alone,  let him prolong  it as much  
as he likes."  It is narrated  (on the authority  of Jabir)  that once Mu'adh  Ibn Jabal  
leading  a people  in Isha' prayer  when  he recited  the Surah  of AJ-Baqarah.  A was


Page 341:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
man came  out of the prayer  which  he completed  alone.  The people  said: "The  
man has proved hypocrite."  Both (Mu'adh  and the man) made mutual  
complaints  to the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  him".  The Messenger  of 
Allah scolded  Mu'adh  and said: "Are you going to put the people  to trial O 
Mu'adh?  Recite  such (short  Surahs  as) Al-A'la,  At-Tariq,  Ash-Shams  (and the 
like of them)."
The Imam's  Duties  Pertaining  To The Pillars  Of The Prayer
They  are also three,  and they  go as follows:
The first duty:  He should  make  short  both bowing  and prostration,  with each  
having  a maximum  of three  Tasbihs.  It is narrated  on the authority  of Anas Ibn 
Malik that he said: "I've never seen a prayer  offered  by anyone  shorter  even  
though  with perfection  than that offered  by the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be 
upon  him"."  But this does not contradict  the narradon  (of both Abu Dawud  and 
An-Nasa'i)  on the same authority  in which Anas Ibn Malik performed  prayer  
behind  Umar  Ibn Abd Al-Aziz,  who was at that time the governor  of Medina,  
after which he said: "I've never prayed  behind  anyone,  whose  way of prayer  
resembles  that of the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" more than this 
young  man."  He resumed:  "We used to utter ten Tasbihs  for each (bowing  and 
prostradon)  while  praying  behind  him."  It is narrated  also that he said: "We used  
to utter,  while praying  behind  the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" ten 
Tasbihs  for each bowing  and prostradon."  This is undoubtedly  good.  But to limif  
that to three Tasbihs  is much better  when the group  of the praying  people  i: 
prolific.  But when  there  gather  only those  who are devoted  wholeheartedly  to the 
religious  service,  there is no harm to increase  them to ten. This is the point of 
adapdng  the different  narradons.  The imam  should  say on raising  his head from  
bowing:  "Allah  hears  such as praises  Him."
The second  duty: It is binding  upon the one led in prayer.  He should  not 
make his bowing  and prostration  synchronous  with those of the imam:  on the 
contrary,  he should  delay in such a way as not to fall in prostration  until the 
imam's  forehead  reaches  the ground.  This is the way the holy companions  
followed  the Messenger  of Allah "Peace be upon him" (according  to the 
unanimous  narradon  on the authority  of Al-Bara'  Ibn Azib).  He should  not also 
fall in bowing  before  the imam  becomes  straight  in bowing.  In this issue,  it is said 
that the people  come  out of the prayer  in three divisions:  some have (the reward  
of) twenty-five  prayers,  and it is those  who glorify,  bow and prostrate  after the 
imam;  some  have (the reward  of) only a single  prayer,  and it is those  who make  
theirs synchronous  with the imam's;  and some have no (reward  of any) prayer,  
and it is those  who hasten  to precede  the imam.
However,  there is difference  among  the people  as to whether  it is or is not 
incumbent  upon  the imam  to prolong  his bowing  to give opportunity  to him who  
likes to join the prayer,  and thus receive  the extra reward  of congregational  prayer  
by virtue  of this bowing  (which  makes  valid the whole  rak'ah).  It might  be 
right to say that there  is no339
more
blame  to do so with sincerity,  on the condition  that it


Page 342:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
should  not lead to overstrain  the attendants  of the prayer,  for their right of 
refraining  from  prolonging  should  be observed.
The third duty: The imam should not make the supplication  of 
testificadon  (Tashahhud)  longer  than the amount  of testification  itself, nor 
should  he favour  himself  with supplication  apart from the others:  but rather  
let him use the plural  and not the singular  formula  in his invocations,  such as: 
"O Allah!  Forgive  us" and not "forgive  me". That's  because  it is undesirable  
for the imam  to favour  himself  on the exclusion  of those  whom  he is leading  
in the prayer.  There  is no blame  upon him to seek refuge  (with Allah from  
Satan) in his testification  through  the five statements  transmitted  from the 
Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him": "We seek refuge  with You from the 
punishment  of (the fire of) Hell, from the punishment  of the grave;  we seek  
refuge  with You from the affliction  of both life and death,  and from the 
affliction  of Al-Masih  Ad-Dajjal;  and if You intend  to put a people  to trial,  
take us unto  You (i.e. cause  us to die) before  being  afflicted."  It is said that he 
was called  Masih  (Antichrist)  for he would  survey  the earth from its end to its 
end; or according  to others  because  one of his eyes would  be dark and look  
like a grape  bulging  out.
The Duties  Which  Pertain  To Dissolving  From  The Prayer
There  are three  duties  which  relate  to finishing  from  the prayer:
The first duty: He should  intend,  with both salutations,  to greet the angels  
and all of the present  people.
The second  duty: He should  keep firm in place  after the end salutation  (for 
some  time).  As such did the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" Abu Bakr  
and Umar  "Allah  be pleased  with them",  let him further  offer  the supererogatory  
prayer  in another  place.  In case there  are women  praying  behind  him, let not him 
stand  until all of them  leave the mosque.  According  to the narration  (of Muslim  
on the authority  of A'ishah)  he "Peace  be upon  him" used to stay in the mosque  
after the prayer  no longer  than what  is enough  for him to say: "O Allah!  You are 
(the source  of) Peace,  and from  You peace  is expected:  Blessed  (and Exalted)  be 
You,  Lord  of Glory,  Majesty  and Honour."
The third  duty:  If he stands  up (after  finishing  from the prayer),  let him face 
the people.  It is undesirable  for the one led in prayer  to stand  before  the imam  
moves.  In this context,  it is narrated  that both Talhah  and Az-Zubair  prayed  
behind  an imam,  and when  he concluded  the prayer  with the End Salutation  they  
said to him: "How  good and perfect  your prayer  is, except  one thing,  that when  
you uttered  the End Salutation,  you did not turn your face (towards  the people)."  
Then they said to the people:  "How  good your prayer  is except  that you left 
before  your imam  turned  his face towards  you." Then,  let the imam  turn away  
from whichever  direction  he likes, be it right and left, even though  the right is 
more  desirable.
Those  duties  apply  to all of the obligatory  prayers,  with the addition  of Qunut  
in the Morning  prayer,  in which  the imam  should  say: "O Allah!  Guide  us" and340
I
I
i
:


Page 343:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
say not "guide  me", and the one led in prayer  should  utter  "Amen"  in response  to 
the supplication.  When comes to the statement:  "You always decide all the 
matters,  and there is none to decide  anything  pertaining  to You",  it is not fitting  
for the one led in prayer  to say "Amen",  for it does not belong  to supplication  
rather  than to praise,  thereupon  he should  recite  it with him, and say the like of 
his saying,  or: "Nay!  And I'm from amongst  those  who bear witness  to that" or 
similar  words.  On the other  hand,  there  is a narration  in support  of raising  both  
hands  during  Qunut.  If this narration  is authentic,  then it will be desirable  to raise  
both hands  during  Qunut.  But this contradicts  the case in the supplication  at the 
conclusion  of testification,  in which  the hands  should  not be raised.  But it might  
be said that the function  of both hands  during  the testification  is to be placed  on 
the thighs  in a special  way, a function  which  they do not have in Qunut.  For this 
reason,  it is not likely  that their function  is to be raised  during  Qunut,  since  this is 
more  fitting  for supplication;  and Allah  knows  best.
Those  are the manners  which  should  be observed  in imamate  and following;  
and Allah  Almighty  helps  us attain  success.341
CHAPTER  FIVE:  ON THE EXCELLENCE  OF FRIDAY  ITS MANNERS,  
TRADITIONS  AND CONDITIONS
The Excellence  Of Friday
It should  be known  that this is a great day, therewith  Allah Almighty  has 
exalted  Islam, and characterized  the Muslims.  He says: "O you who believe!  
When  the call is proclaimed  to prayer  on Friday  (the Day of Assembly),  hasten  
earnestly  to the Remembrance  of Allah,  and leave off business  (and traffic):  that 
is best for you if you but knew!"  (Al-Jumu'ah  9)
In this way, He Almighty  has forbidden  any business  in the affairs  of this 
world,  as well as anything  that might  entertain  from hastening  to perform  prayer  
on it.
(It is narrated  by Ibn Majah  on the authority  of Jabir that) the Messenger  of 
Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "Verily,  Allah Almighty  has enjoined  you (to 
sanctify)  Friday  on this day of mine,  in this station  of mine (among  you)."  (It is 
narrated  by Ahmad  and Al-Hakim  on the authority  of Abu Al-Ja'd  Ad-Damari  
that) the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "He, who refrains  from  
(attending  the congregational  prayer  on) Friday  for three times with no legal  
excuse,  Allah will have placed a seal on his heart." (According  to another  
narration  by Al-Baihaqi  on the authority  of Ibn Abbas)  he said: "He, who  
refrains  from (attending  the congregational  prayer  on) Friday  for three times  
with no legal excuse,  he will have left Islam  behind  him." A man visited  Ibn 
Abbas  and asked  him about  a man who died and never  witness  the (prayer  of) 
Friday,  nor attended  any congregational  prayer,  thereupon  he said to him: "He


Page 344:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
will be admitted  to the fire (of Hell)."  He kept visiting  him and asking  him the 
same question,  and Ibn Abbas  gave him the same  answer:  "He will be admitted  
to the fire."
(It is narrated  unanimously  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that the 
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "The people  of both Scriptures  
(Torah  and Gospel)  were given Friday  (to sanctify)  but they differed  about  it, 
with the result that they were diverted  from it, and Allah Almighty  guided  us 
(Muslims)  to it, and kept it for this nation,  and made  it a festival  for them: they  
are the most fitting  to lead the people  (in exalting  and sanctifying  it), while  those  
of both Scriptures  are to follow  them."  It is narrated  (by Ash-Shafi'i,  At-Tabarani  
and Ibn Mardawaih)  on the authority  of Anas from the Messenger  of Allah  
"Peace  be upon him" that he said: "Gabriel  "Peace  be upon him" came to me 
with a pure mirror  in his hand  and said: 'This Friday  has been enjoined  upon  you 
by your Lord (to sanctify)  in order to be a festival  for you as well as for your  
nation  after you.' I asked: 'What have we in it?' He said: "You have an hour  
therein,  in which  none invokes  Allah for good which  has been doomed  to him,  
but that He will give it to him, and in case it is not doomed  to him, He will keep  
for him what is greater  than it; and none seeks refuge  (with Allah) from an evil 
which  has been doomed  against  him, but that Allah Almighty  will protect  him 
from  what  is more  severe  than it. it is the chiefs  of all days in our sight,  and in the 
hereafter,  we will call it the Day of More Good.'  I asked him about  the reason,  
and he said: 'Your  Lord Almighty  has taken  in the Garden  a valley  more  fragrant  
than musk, (in which all things are) white.  When it is Friday,  Allah Almighty  
descends  from His Highest  Position  on His Throne,  and rises His Glory  upon  
them  until they are able to see His Generous  Honoured  Countenance."'
(It is narrated  by Muslim  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that) the 
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "The best day on which  sun has 
risen is Friday,  on which  Adam  was created,  on which  he was admitted  to the 
Garden,  on which  he was (driven  from the Garden  and) made  to descend  to the 
earth,  on which Allah turned  to him in repentance,  on which  he died, and on 
which  the Hour  (of  Judgement)  will be established.  It is the day of more  good in 
die Sight  of Allah  Almighty;  and this is its name  among  the angels  in the heaven.  
It is the day on which  (the faithful  believers  will) see the Countenance  of Allah  
Almighty  in the Garden."  According  to the narration  (of Ibn Hibban  on the 
authority  of Anas the Messenger  of Allah said): "Every  Friday,  six hundred  
thousand  are set free by Allah  from the fire (of Hell)."
According  to the narration  (of Ibn Hibban,  Abu Na'im  and Al-Baihaqi  on the 
authority  of A'ishah,  even though  Al-Ghazali  ascribes  it to) Anas that the 
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "If Friday  ahs 
passed  with safety (from committing  sins) all the other days will subsequently  
pass with safety  (from  committing  sins)."  (It is narrated  by Abu Dawud  on the 
authority  of Abu Qatadah  that) the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him"  
said: "The Hell is kindled  everyday  before  sun passes  the meridian,  i.e. just when  
it is straight  in the middle  of the sky. So, pray not at that time, except  on Friday,342


Page 345:
Book  four: The mysteries  and duties  of prayer
on which  prayer  might  be performed  all the time, and on which  the Hell is not 
kindled."
According  to Ka'b: "From  amongst  all the towns,  Allah Almighty  has made  
Mecca  superior  to all the towns,  from amongst  the months  Ramadan  to all the 
others,  from amongst  all the days Friday  to all the others,  and from amongst  all 
the nights  the Night  of Power  to all the others."  it is said that birds and insects  
meet  each other  on Friday  with salutadon  and say: "Peace!  Peace!  How  good this 
day is!" (It is narrated  by Abu Na'im  on the authority  of Jabir  and At-Tirmidhi  
the authority  of Abdullah  Ibn Umar that) the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "He, who dies on Friday,  or on the night  
prior  to Friday,  Allah  Almighty  writes  for him the reward  of a martyr  and saves  
him from the affliction  of the grave."
The Exposition  Of The Conditions  And Traditions  Of Friday  Prayer
It should  be known  that it shares  all conditions  with the other (obligatory)  
prayers;  and there  are further  six conditions  characteristic  of it:
The first condition  pertains  to the time: if the salutation  of the imam  (at the 
conclusion  of the prayer)  occurs  just at the time of Asr prayer,  he will be 
considered  to have missed  the Friday  prayer,  and in this case, it is incumben]  
upon him to complete  it four rak'ahs  as Zhuhr  prayer.  But, there is difference  
about  him who catches  only a single  rak'ah  of it, and his last rak'ah (which  he 
prays alone) occurs  out of time (whether  he should  or should  not complete  it 
four rak'ahs  as Zhuhr  prayer).
The second  condition  pertains  to the place:  it is invalid  to be offered  in the 
desert,  the waste land, or among  the movable  dwellings  and tents. It should  
rather  be performed  in a gathering  place of unmovable  buildings,  containing  at 
least forty of those upon whom  Friday  prayer  is binding.  The village  is like the 
city in this respect.  It is not conditional  to it that the magistrate  should  attend,  as 
well as it is not necessary  to take his leave for it, even though  it is more  desirable  
to take his leave.
The third condition  pertains  to the number:  it should  not be held valid with  
no less than forty  of free men from  amongst  the residents  whom  the enjoinment  
of obligations  and duties  covers  . Residency  here means  that they should  not be 
in the habit of leaving  the place every summer  or winter  (on journey).  In case  
they depart  from the place,  with the result  that the number  becomes  under  forty,  
whether  during  the sermon  or the prayer,  the Friday  prayer  will not be held valid.  
That's because  this number  should attend the whole ceremonies  from the 
beginning  to the end.
The fourth  condition  pertains  to the congregation:  if even forty offers  Friday  
prayer  within  the borders  of a village,  but in different  groups  and places,  the 
congregation  will not be held valid. That's  because  the congregation  should  not 
be less than forty in number.  But it is permissible  for him who catches  only a 
single  rak'ah  of it to pray the other  rak'ah  alone;  and in case he does not catch  the 
bowing  of the other rak'ah (in congregation),  let him follow  the congregation343
on


Page 346:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
with the intention  to perform  Zhuhr  prayer  (i.e. to offer four rak'ahs),  which  he 
should  complete  once  the imam  utters  the End Salutation.
The fifth condition  pertains  to the number  of congregations:  the 
congregation  should  not be preceded  by another  in the same mosque  of the 
same  town.  But if the people  are great  in number,  and beyond  the capacity  of 
one mosque,  they might be distributed  to two, three, four, or more  
congregations  as it is required  by the need to perform  Friday prayer  in 
different  mosques.  But if there is no necessary  need, it is right to establish  
first the congregational  prayer  of Friday  because  of which  the forbiddance  (of 
any prayer  else to be performed  simultaneously)  is held. But in the presence  of 
a necessary  need (for more  than a congregation),  it is better  to pray behind  the 
better  of imams;  and in case of their equality,  the more ancient  mosque  is 
better;  and in the event of their equality,  the nearer  mosque  is better.  The  
excellence  of the prolific  number  of congregation  should  be also observed  in 
the choice.
The sixth  condition  pertains  to both sermons:  of a surety,  both sermons  are 
obligatory,  and standing  while delivering  them  is also obligatory,  and the sitting  
(for a short break)  between  them is obligatory  too. The first sermon  has four  
obligations  (to be observed):  the first relates  to the praise  (of Allah),  which  is, at 
least, to say: "Praise  be to Allah".  The second  is to invoke  Allah's  Prayer  and 
Blessing  upon the Prophet  "Peace  be upon him". The third is to advise (the 
people  and oneself)  to safeguard  themselves  from (the punishment  of) Allah  
Almighty.  The fourth  is to recite (at least) a Holy Verse  from the Holy Qur'an.  
The same four obligations  are due in the other sermon,  with the exception  of 
substituting  supplication  for recitation.  It is binding  upon the forty-men  
congregation  (at least) to listen  and pay attention  to both sermons.
As to the traditions  of the Friday  prayer,  when  the sun declines  and passes  the 
meridian,  Mu'adhdhin  pronounces  the call to prayer,  and the imam sits on the 
pulpit,  the prayer  should  be interrupted  except  the complement,  and the speech  
would  not cease before  the imam  inaugurates  the sermon.  Let the preacher  pay 
salutation  to the attendants  once he turns  his face towards  them,  and they should  
return  the greeting  to him. When  the Mu'adhdhin  finishes  (from  the second  call),  
let the preacher  stand  facing  the people,  turning  not sideways,  and let him engage  
his hands  by the handle  of the sword,  the short-stick  or spear,  or the pulpit,  in 
order  not to play  with them  anyway,  or let him place  one of them  over the other.
Let him deliver  two sermons,  making  a short  break  between  them,  in which  he 
should sit. Let not him use abstruse  and peculiar  words, nor protract  his 
utterances  nor vibrate  his voice. The sermon  should  be brief, impressive  and 
comprehensive.  It is desirable  to recite  (at least) a Holy  Verse  from the Qur'an  in 
the second  sermon.  Let none  who enters  the mosque  while  the imam  is delivering  
his sermon  pay salutation,  and in case he does, he should  receive  no verbal  
answer  from the attendants,  unless  it is by way of hinting,  in which  there is no 
harm.  None  should  say to the sneezers  (during  the sermon):  "Might  Allah  bestow  
mercy  upon  you" (in case he says "Praise  be to Allah").344


Page 347:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer
Those conditions  pertain  to the validity.  But there are many condidons  
relating  to the matter  of obligation.  However,  the Friday  prayer  is obligatory  only  
upon  a free Muslim  male,  in full possession  of mental  faculties,  who has attained  
puberty,  and is resident  in a town  including  at least forty  persons  having  the same  
characteristics,  or in a village  which  is affiliate  to a larger  town,  provided  that the 
call of the Mu'adhdhin  reaches  it through  its entrance,  when  there  is silence  and 
the Mu'adhdhin  is raising  his voice;  and this is in view of Allah's  statement:  " O 
you who believe!  When  the call is proclaimed  to prayer  on Friday  (the Day of 
Assembly),  hasten  earnestly  to the Remembrance  of Allah,  and leave  off business  
(and traffic):  that is best for you if you but knew!"  (Al-Jumu'ah  9)
? J! \
4 o oj %>•
But those  are given  concession  to leave the Friday  prayer  for such excuses  as 
the heavy  rain, mud, terror,  sickness,  nursery,  in case the patient  has none to take 
care of him other  than such nurse.  Such being  the case,  it is desirable  for those  of 
legal excuses  to delay the Zhuhr  prayer  until the people  finish from Friday  
congregational  prayer.  On the other  hand,  if such persons  as a patient,  a slave,  a 
traveller,  or a woman,  their congregational  Friday  prayer  will be held valid, and 
thus it will exempt  them  from  Zhuhr  prayer;  and Allah  knows  best.
The Exposition  Of The Manners  Of Friday  Prayer
They  are usually  ten according  to their  sequence:
The first: One should  get ready  for it on Thursday,  affirming  his intent  (to 
attend  it), and preparing  himself  to receive  kindly  and warmly  its extra  reward:  let 
him engage  in supplication,  asking  for Allah's  Forgiveness,  and Tasbih  after the 
Asr prayer  of Thursday,  since  this hour  counters  the unknown  hour  on Friday  (in 
which  the invocation  receives  answer).  According  to one of the early righteous  
men: "Allah  Almighty  has extra bounty  other than the sustenance  which He 
distributes  among  His servants;  and He does not give such bounty  but to him,  
who asks Him for it in the evening  of Thursday  as well as on Friday."  On that 
day, let him wash his dress and clean  it well, and prepare  perfume  (to apply  it to 
his body  on Friday)  if he has no perfume,  and further  empty  his heart from such  
of occupations  as might  hinder  him from  going  early  in the morning  to attend  the 
Congregational  Friday  prayer.
Let him also on that night (of Thursday)  intend  to observe  fast on Friday,  
since  it has excellence,  particularly  if it is joined  to the fasting  of Thursday  or 
Saturday;  and of a surety,  it is undesirable  to fast it alone.  Let him give life to 
that night by standing  for supererogatory  prayer  and concluding  the Holy  
Qur'an,  for it has a great excellence  which  belongs  to that of Friday.  Let him 
have sexual  intercourse  with his wife on that night  or on Friday  (morning),  for 
it is desirable  in the sight  of some  people,  who understand  that meaning  from  
the narration  (of Ibn Majah  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  in which  the 
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said): "Allah's  Mercy  be upon him345


Page 348:
346 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
who (has sexual  relation  with his wife and thus) causes  (her) to take a bath,  
and he himself  takes  a bath (on Friday);  then he hastens  to go (to the mosque)  
at the earliest  portion  (of the due time of the prayer)."  But this does not 
cancel  out the other  concept  taken from that narration,  in which  the dress is 
substituted  for the wife.
In this way, the etiquette  of reception  is full, therewith  one comes  out of the 
assembly  of the heedless,  who, when it is Friday  morning,  say: "What  is that 
day?" according  to one of the righteous  predecessors:  "He who receives  the 
greatest  portion  of (the reward  of) Friday  is the one who  waits  it in observance  of 
and getting  ready for it from the previous  day; and he who receives  the least  
portion  thereof  is the one who, when  it is Friday  morning,  says: "Which  day is 
it?" it is related  that some  of those  (righteous  men) used to spend  the night  (prior  
to it) in the mosque,  in expectation  for it.
The second:  When  it is morning  (of Friday),  let him start with bathing  after  
sunrise,  but not very early,  for the nearer  it is to the time of going  to the mosque,  
the closer  he will be to cleanness.  Bathing  (on Friday)  is firmly  desirable,  even  
though  some  learned  men are of the opinion  of its obligation.  (It is narrated  by 
both Sahihs  on the authority  of Abu Sa'id that) the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be 
upon  him" said: "Performing  Ghusl  on Friday  is binding  upon  him has attained  
the age of puberty."  According  to the well-known  narration  (of both Sahihs  and 
others)  on the authority  of Ibn Umar  he "Peace  be upon him" said: "He, who  
comes  to (attend  the congregational  prayer  of) Friday,  let him take bath (before  
he comes)."  (According  to another  narration  by Ibn Hibban  and Al-Baihaqi  on 
the authority  of Ibn Umar)  he "Peace  be upon him" said: "He, who comes  to 
(attend  the congregational  prayer  of) Friday,  be it men or women,  let him (or her) 
take bath (before  he (or she) comes)."
It was the habit of the inhabitants  of Medina  to say to each other,  whenever  
they exchanged  abuses:  "Verily,  you are more  evil than him who takes  no bath on 
Friday."  (It is narrated  by Muslim  on the authority  of Ibn Umar):  While  Umar  
Ibn Al-Khattab  was standing  and delivering  the sermon  on a Friday,  Uthman  Ibn 
Affan  came.  Umar  called  (and asked)  him: "What  is the time now?"  he seemed  to 
have criticized  him for his delay.  He replied:  "I did nothing,  after I had heard  the 
Adhan,  more  than I performed  ablution  and then came out." Thereupon  Umar  
said to him: "Did you perform  only the ablution  although  you know  that Allah ’s 
Messenger  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him” used to order  us to take a 
bath (on Fridays)?"
The permissibility  of taking  no bath on Friday  is attested  by It is the ablution  
of Uthman  "Allah  be pleased  with him", as well as by the narration  (of Abu  
Dawud,  At-Tirmidhi  and An-Nasa'i  on the authority  of Samurah)  in which  the 
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "He, who performs  ablution  on 
Friday,  it is good;  and he, who takes  bath,  no doubt,  bathing  is better."  When  one 
takes  bath to get clean  from the ceremonial  impurity,  let him pour  water  over the 
whole  of his body once again, with the intention  to take bath for the Friday  
rituals.  But in case he takes  only  a single  bath,  it suffices  him for purification.


Page 349:
Book  four: The mysteries  and duties  of prayer
Yet, it will be much  better  if he intends  to take bath for both,  and merges  
the bath of Friday  in that of ceremonial  impurity.  In this respect,  it is narrated  
that one of the holy companions  entered  into his son and found  him having  
taken  bath. He asked  him: "Have  you taken  bath for Friday  rituals?"  he said:  
"No, but to get clean  from the ceremonial  impurity."  On that he asked  him to 
take another  bath." He related  to him the narration  that taking Ghusl is 
binding  upon him who has attained  puberty.  He ordered  him to take another  
Ghusl  for Friday  because  his son had not included  it in his intention.  But it 
was not unlikely  to be said that it was the cleanness  which  was meant,  and it 
was achieved  even with no intent.  But this applies  also to ablution;  and since  
executing  law is a kind of worship,  its extra  reward  then should  be sought  for. 
Whoever  takes Ghusl and then passes wind or makes sound,  he should  
perform  ablution,  and this will not cancel  his Ghusl;  but it is better  to guard  
against  that.
The third: it pertains  to adornment,  which is of three things: clothes,  
cleanness  and perfume.  The cleanness  implies  brushing  the teeth with the 
toothpick,  shaving  the head, trimming  the nails, and cutting  the mustache,  in 
addition  to those things  which  we've mentioned  in the book of purification.  
According  to Ibn Mas'ud:  "He, who trims his nails on Friday,  Allah Almighty  
takes an ailment  out of his body,  and gets healing  into it." if he enters  the public  
bath on Thursday  or Wednesday,  what  is intended  will have been accomplished.  
Let him on that very day apply  the best kind and the most  pleasant  of perfume  t< 
his body,  in order  that it should  prevail  over the offensive  smells,  and have th 
attendants  nearby  him relish the most pleasant  odor of him, and get the best 
satisfaction  and rest with him. However,  the best of men's  perfume  is that, which  
smells  good,  and has no colour,  whereas  the best kind of women's  perfume  is 
that, whose  colour  appears,  and it has no smell (according  to the narration  of 
Abu Dawud,  At-Tirmidhi  and An-Nasa'i  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah).  
According  to Ash-Shafi'i:  "He, who cleans  his dress,  will be less anxious,  and he, 
who applies  perfume  to his body,  will advance  in mind  (and wisdom)."
As far as clothes  are concerned,  the most desirable  is the white of dresses,  
since it is the dearest  in the Sight of Allah  Almighty.  Let one wear no dress,  
because  of which  he might  be a centre  of the people's  attraction.  It is not out of 
the right way of sunnah  nor is it of any excellence  to put on black dress,  and 
some people  dislike  looking  at it, and render  it something  innovated  after the 
Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him".  Putting  on a turban  is desirable  on that 
day. (It is narrated  by At-Tabarani  on the authority  of Abu Ad-Darda',  but Al- 
Ghazali  relates  it on the authority  of) Wathilah  Ibn Al-Asqa'  that the Messenger  
of Allah "Peace  be upon  him" said: "Verily,  Allah  and His angels  invoke  prayer  
and blessing  upon those who put on the turbans  on Friday."  But if he is 
disturbed  by the heat, there will be no harm to put it off before  and after the 
prayer,  but not at the time of walking  from the house  to (the mosque  to attend  
the congregational  prayer  of) Friday,  nor at the time of prayer,  nor at the time of 
the imam's  ascent  to the pulpit,  nor during  his sermon.347


Page 350:
348 The quarter  of the acts of worship
The fourth:  This pertains  to going  very early in the morning  to the mosque;  
and it is desirable  to aim at the mosque  from  as far as two or three Farsakhs.  Let 
him go very early  in the morning,  and enter  just at the rise of the dawn.  The extra  
reward  of going  very early in the morning  to the mosque  is very great. In his 
walking  earnesdy  to attend  the Friday  prayer,  one should  be submissive  and 
humble,  and should  have  the intention  to stay in the mosque  in the state of I'tikaf  
until the time  of prayer,  making  his main  goal to give quick  response  to the call of 
Allah Almighty  to the Friday  prayer,  and hasten  to get His Good  Pleasure  and 
Forgiveness.  In this respect  (it is narrated  unanimously  on the authority  of Abu  
Hurairah  that) The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him"  
said: "Any person  who takes a bath on Friday  like the bath of ceremonial  
impurity  (after  sexual  intercourse)  and then goes for the prayer  (in the first hour  
as early as it could be), it is as if he has sacrificed  a camel (in Allah's  cause).  
Whoever  goes in the second  hour, it is as if he has sacrificed  a cow. Whoever  
goes in the third hour,  then it is as if he has sacrificed  a horned  ram. If one goes  
in the fourth  hour, then it is as if he has sacrificed  a hen. Whoever  goes in the 
fifth hour, then it is as if he has offered  an egg. If the imam comes  out the 
records  would  be folded  up, the pens (of recording)  would  be lifted, and the 
angels  would  gather  near the pulpit  in order  to listen to the celebration  (of the 
Praises  of Allah).  If anyone  comes  after that, he will have come  just for prayer,  
and no extra  reward  will be assured  to him. ”
The first hour  here corresponds  to the rise of the sun, the second  to the time  
of its being  high and hot, the third to the time of its expansion,  which  causes  the 
heat of the sand to be too scorching  to warm  up the feet, and both the fourth  
and the fifth correspond  to the time between  the high forenoon  up to the sun 
decline;  and the reward  of the last hour is insignificant,  and the time of the sun 
decline  is just for the prayer,  and there  is no extra  reward  (to be received  by him 
who attends  the Friday  prayer  just in it). (It is narrated  on the authority  of Abu  
Hurairah  that) the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: ""There  are 
three (deeds),  and if the people  know  which  (reward  they will receive  in doing)  
them,  surely,  they would  ride the swiftest  camels  to attain  them:  (pronouncing  the 
Call to Prayer)  Adhan,  (standing  in) the first row (in the prayer),  and going  very  
early to (the mosque  to attend  the ceremonies  of) Friday  prayer."  According  to 
Ahmad  Ibn Hanbal:  "The best of those (three)  is to go very early to attend  the 
ceremonies  of Friday  prayer)."
It is narrated  (by Ibn Mardawaih  on the authority  of Ali that the Messenger  
of Allah said): "When  it is Friday,  the angels  will come  and sit at the gates of 
mosques  (in which  the congregational  prayers  are performed),  having  in their  
hands  documents  of silver  and pens of gold, in order  to record  the names  of 
him who comes  first and the one who follows  him (to attend  the prayer)  
according  to their positions  (which  depends  upon the succession  of their  
arrival)."  It is narrated  (by Al-Baihaqi  on the authority  of Amr Ibn Shu'aib  
from his father  from his grandfather  that the Prophet  said): "The angels  miss  
the man who is late from coming  at his usual  time on Friday,  and they say to


Page 351:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer ---------------------------------
each other:  'What  has happened  to so and so? What  has delayed  him to come  
at his usual time?'  they then say: 'O Allah!  If it is poverty  which  has delayed  
him, make  him independent!  If it is sickness  which  has delayed  him, cure him!  
If it is business  which delayed  him, make him sincerely  devoted  to Your  
service!  If it is entertainment  which  has delayed  him, let him come with his 
heart  to Your  obedience!"'
During  the first generation  (of Muslims),  the ways were seen to be full of 
people  at the last portion  of the night,  a short  while before  dawn,  and after the 
rise of the dawn,  who were walking  in crowds  across the streets  towards  the 
mosques,  as if they were on the days of festival.  This state remained  as such until  
it vanished.  It is said that the first innovation  (of heresy)  to happen  in Islam  was 
the abandonment  of going  very early to the gathering  mosques  on Friday.  How  
should  the Muslims  not feel shy of both the Jews and the Christians,  who go very  
early in the morning  to their places  of worship  on Saturday  and Sunday?  How  
should  they not feel shy of the world  seekers,  who go very early in the morning  
to the large spaces  of markets  to practice  transaction  and gain profit?  How  
should  the hereafter  seekers  not compete  them  as if in a race (in their going  very  
early  to the mosques)?
It is said that the position  of the people in their nearness  to see the 
Countenance  of Allah (in the hereafter)  will be determined  by the degrees  of 
earliness  of their going  in the morning  to attend  the Friday  prayer.  It is narrated  
that once Ibn Mas'ud  "Allah  be pleased  with him" entered  the mosque  early in 
the morning  (of Friday)  and behold!  He found  three having  preceded  him and 
entered  the mosque  earlier  than him. On that he became  anxious  and said to 
himself  by way of blaming  it: "Fourth  of four men,  and verily,  a fourth  of four is 
not far from  attaining  (the merit  of) earliness."
The fifth: it pertains  to the way of entering  the mosque.  One should  not 
step over the necks  of the people  (i.e. to surpass  them  in order  to have his place  
ahead  of them),  nor should  he pass in front of them;  and of a surety,  his early  
arrival  makes  it easy for him to guard against  that. There  is a strong  threat  
waiting  him who steps over the necks  of the people,  i.e. that he will be made  a 
bridge  on the Day of Judgement,  over which  the people  will pass (according  to 
the narration  of both At-Tirmidhi  and Ibn Majah  on the authority  of Mu'adh  
Ibn Anas).  It is narrated  (by Ibn Al-Mubarak)  on the authority  of Ibn Juraij  that 
while the Messenger  of Allah was delivering  the sermon  (on Friday)  he saw a 
man passing  over the necks  of the people  until he came forward  and sat. when  
the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" finished  from the prayer  he stood  
in the way of the man until he met him and asked  him: "O so and so! What  has 
prevented  you from sharing  the Friday  prayer  with us?" he said: "O Messenger  
of Allah! I've shared  the Friday  prayer  with you." On that the Messenger  of 
Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "Have  I not seen you passing  over the necks  
of the people?"  He referred  to the fact that his conduct  made  fruidess  his deed.
It is further  narrated  (by Abu Dawud,  An-Nasa'i  and Ibn Hibban  on the 
authority  of Abdullah  Ibn Busr that) he "Peace  be upon him" said to (him who349


Page 352:
350 The quarter  of the acts of worship
stepped  over the necks of the people):  "What  has prevented  you from offering  
prayer  with us?" He said: "Have  you not seen me O Messenger  of Allah?"  he 
"Peace  be upon him" said: "I've seen that you have delayed  to come  early, and 
further  caused  harm to the people  (when  you stepped  over their necks to sit 
ahead of them)."  but once the first row is seen to be empty  and left by the 
attendants,  one has the right to step over their necks to sit in it, for they have  
wasted  their right, and left the position  of the extra reward.  According  to Al- 
Hassan:  "You  might  step over the necks  of the people  who sit at the gates of the 
mosques  on Friday,  since they have no sanctity."  If, on entering  the mosque,  
there  are but the praying  people,  let not him pay them salutation,  for in this case,  
he will impose  upon  them  to give answer  unfittingly.
The sixth:  let none pass in front  of the people,  and rather  sit wherever  he is, 
close  to a pillar  or a wall (as possible  as he could),  in order  that none should  pass  
in front  of him during  prayer.  It is true that the passage  (in front of the praying  
man) does not interrupt  the prayer,  but it is forbidden  in view  of the narration  (of 
Al-Bazzar  on the authority  of Zaid Ibn Khalid  in which)  he "Peace  be upon  him"  
said: "It is better  for one to stand  and wait for as long as forty  years than to pass  
in front  of a praying  man."  (According  to another  narration  on the authority  of 
Abu Na'im  on the authority  of Ibn Umar):  "It is much  better  for one to be ashes  
or bones  decomposed,  scattered  about  by the wind than to pass in front of a 
praying  man." It is further  narrated  (by As-Sarraj  on the authority  of Zaid Ibn 
Khalid)  pertaining  to the praying  man and the passer-by  in front of him, that 
once he offered  prayer  on the way when  he said: "If the passer-by  in front of a 
praying  man and a praying  place  knows  what  is on them  (during  prayer),  it will be 
much  better  for the passer-by  to stand  and wait as long  as forty  years  than to pass  
in front  of the praying  man."
The pillar, the wall and the furnished  sheet of praying  act as a limit for the 
praying  man, in such a way that if one tries to surpass  this limit, he should  be 
driven  away (even  by force).  (It is narrated  unanimously  on the authority  of Abu  
Sa'id that) he "Peace  be upon him" said: "Let him (the praying  man) drive him 
away (i.e. the passer-by  in front of him). If he (the latter)  refuses,  let him drive  
him away once again.  If he insists  he then should  fight him, for in this case he 
acts as a devil."  It was the habit of Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri  to drive away  him who  
tried to pass in front  of him, so much  violently  that he would  knock  him down.  
Once  he did so, and the man (whom  he drove  away) hung to him, and made  a 
complaint  against  him to Marwan  (the Medina's  governor).  He told him that the 
Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" ordered  him to do so. But in case there  
is no pillar,  let him fix something  in front of him, equal  to a cubit  in length,  in 
order  to act as a sign of his limit.
The seventh:  one should  seek the first row, which  is of great excellence  and 
superiority  as we've  related  earlier.  It is narrated  (by both Ibn Majah  and Abu  
Dawud  on the authority  of Aws Ibn Aws Ath-Thaqafi  that) he “Allah ’s blessing  
and peace  be upon him” said: “He, who (has sexual  relation  with his wife and 
thus) causes  (her) to take a bath, and he himself  takes a bath on Friday;  then he


Page 353:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
hastens  to go (to the mosque)  at the earliest  portion  (of the due time of the 
prayer)  and attends  the first portion  of the sermon;  (and goes)  walking  not riding;  
becomes  close to the imam and pays attention  (to the sermon),  and does not 
speak  (during  the sermon):  this will be expiation  for (such  of sins as he commits  
in the period)  between  both Fridays,  and three days besides"  (or according  to 
another  version,  "Allah  will forgive  for him (all of his sins he commits)  from the 
current  Friday to the next Friday").  But this should be on the condition,  
according  to some  narrations,  not to step over the necks  of the people.
However,  the seeker  of the first row should  not be heedless  of three  things:
Firstly:  if he sees in the first row something  disapproved  and he knows  he has 
no power  to change,  such as the wearing  of silk, whether  on the part of the imam  
or anyone  else, or the prayer  in heavy  weapons  which  might  divert  the praying  
ones, or in weapons  decked  with gold, or the like of that which should  be 
rejected,  it is much  safer for him to be in the rear. This is what a group  of the 
learned  men of knowledge  did, seeking  safety  and peace.  It was said to Bishr  Ibn 
Al-Harith:  "We see that you come  (to the mosque)  very early in the morning  but 
pray in the last row."  On that he said: "Verily,  it is the nearness  of hearts  and not 
of bodies  which  is intended."  He referred  to the fact that this position  (which  he 
took)  was closer  to the safety  and peace  of his heart.
Once  Sufyan  Ath-Thawri  saw Shu'aib  Ibn Harb  sitting  close  to the pulpit,  and 
paying  attention  to the sermon  of Abu  Ja'far  AI-Mansur.  When  he finished  from  
the prayer  he said to him: "I've been occupied  by your closeness  to this (Al- 
Mansur):  do you feel secure  against  hearing  something  form him which you 
should  reject,  and you could  not do it?" he made  a mention  to him of the wearing  
of blackness  which  they had innovated.  He asked  him: "O Abu Abdullah!  Is the 
following  narration  (of Abu Dawud  on the authority  of Samurah)  not sufficient:  
"Come  close (to the imam)  and pay your attention  (to him)"?"  he said: "Woe  to 
you! This implies  only those  rightly-guided  and well-guided  caliphs  (who  were  the 
real successors  of the Prophet).  But as for those,  the farther  you become  form  
them and the less you look at them,  the closer  you become  to the Presence  of 
Allah  Almighty."
Sa'id Ibn Amir  said: Once,  I offered  prayer  by the side of Abu Ad-Darda'.  He 
kept moving  backward  to the rear of rows until  we returned  back  to the last row.  
When  we finished  from the prayer  I asked  him: "Is it not said that the best of 
rows  is the first of them?"  he said: "We know  that with certainty.  But this nation,  
from amongst  all the nations,  will receive  Allah's  Mercy  and Sight. If Allah  
Almighty  looks at anyone  of His servants  in prayer,  He will forgive  for him as 
well as for such of the people  as stands  behind  him. I returned  back  in the hope  
that Allah  Almighty  might  forgive  me through  anyone  of the people  at whom  He 
might  look."  According  to another  version  he added:  I heard  the Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" having  said: "That,  and if 
returns  back with this intention,  and out of giving  preference  to others  
himself,  and showing  good manners,  there  will be no harm."  At that point  it is351
one
over


Page 354:
352 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
said that "The (rewards  of) deeds  are (reckoned)  in accordance  to the intentions  
(of their  doers)."
Secondly:  in the absence  of any loges or compartments  taken from the area  
of the mosque  to be specified  only for the magistrates  and governors,  the first 
row then  is desirable,  otherwise,  it is undesirable  in the sight  of some  learned  men  
to enter  the loge. Both  Al-Hassan  and Bakr  Al-Muzani  used not to offer  prayer  in 
the loge, seeing  that it was restricted  only to the magistrates  and governors,  as 
one of the innovations  made  in the mosques  after the death  of the Messenger  of 
Allah  "Peace  be upon  him".  To be sure, the whole  area of the mosque  should  be 
for the common  use of all the people  (who  like to practice  their  religious  service),  
and taking  a loge from the mosque  contradicts  that. But it is well-known  that 
both  Anas  Ibn Malik  and Imran  Ibn Hussain  prayed  in the loge,  and they did not 
dislike  that for the sake of attaining  closeness  (to the imam).  This suggests  that 
such aversion  is limited  when  there  is restriction  in the use of such  loge. But there  
is no aversion  in the loge itself,  as long as its use is not restricted  to anyone  and 
not to all the people.
Thirdly:  the pulpit  interrupts  some of the rows. However,  the first row is 
that which  is connected,  and it occupies  the area in front of the pulpit  and 
what  is on both its ends is interrupted.  According  to Sufyan  Ath-Thawri:  "The  
first row is that which appears  in front of the pulpit."  This statement  is 
reasonable,  since  it is connected,  and he who sits in it faces the instructor,  and 
listens  to his sermon.  But it is not unlikely  to say that the first row is that 
which  is the closest  to the Qiblah;  and in this way, there  is no point  to regard  
the pulpit.  Furthermore,  it is undesirable  to offer prayer  in the markets  or in 
the spaces  which  are outside  the mosques.  Many companions  used to beat  
men (who  were praying  there)  and force  them  to leave  such spaces  outside  the 
mosque.
The eighth:  Let one interrupt  the prayer  once the imam  comes  out, and let 
him further  cease to speak. He should  rather  engage  himself  in answering  the 
Mu'adhdhin,  and after that he should  pay attention  to the sermon.  Some folk 
people were in the habit of falling in prostration  on the standing  of the 
Mu'adhdhins,  but this has no reference  either  in the Prophetic  traditions  or in the 
historical  narrations.  But if it coincides  with any of those prostrations  of 
recitation  (of the Qur'an)  there will be no harm  in it for supplication,  since this 
time is meritorious,  and prostration  in it could  not be judged  as forbidden,  since  
there  is no reason  for forbidding  such prostration.
It is narrated  that both Ali and Uthman  "Allah  be pleased  with them"  said:  
"He, who pays attention  (to the sermon)  and keeps silent,  will have a double  
reward;  and he, who pays no attention  but keeps  silent  will have a single  reward;  
and he, who listens  (to the sermon  during  which  he) speaks  with falsity  will bear a 
double  of sins; and he, who does not listen but speaks  with falsity  will bear a 
single  sin." (It is narrated  by At-Tirmidhi,  Anas  and Abu Dawud  on the authority  
of Abu Hurairah  that) he "Peace  be upon him" said: "He, who says to his 
companion  (who  sits by his side) while  the imam  is delivering  the sermon:  "Keep


Page 355:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer
silent"  has, indeed,  spoken  with falsity;  and he, who speaks  with falsity  (during  
the sermon)  will have  no (reward  for) Friday  congregation."
This signifies  the fact that even to prompt  somebody  to keep silent  should  be 
by way of signals  or throwing  him with pebbles,  and not through  speech.  It is 
narrated  (by Ibn Majah  and others  on the authority  of Ubai Ibn Ka’b that) On 
one Friday  the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him” 
recited  (in the sermon)  the Surah of Al-Mulk.  Then,  Abu Dharr  poked  asked  
Ubai Ibn Ka'b: “When  has this Surah  been revealed?  I’ve never  heard  it before  
now! ” He beckoned  to him to keep silent.  When  the Messenger  of Allah  finished  
from the prayer  and descended  from  the pulpit,  and they turned  away,  Abu Dharr  
said to Ubai: “I asked  you when this Surah  had been revealed;  and you did not 
tell me (what  is the reason?) ” Ubai said to him: “You will receive  nothing  from  
(the reward  of) this Friday  congregation  (more  than the sin of your vain talk).”  
When  he went to the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon  
him”, and made a mention  of that to him, and told him of what Ubai said, the 
Messenger  of Allah  “Peace  be upon  him” said: “Ubai  has told the truth. ”
If one is sitting  far from the imam,  he should  not talk about  anything  such as 
even the knowledge  or the like of it, for this might  lead to noise,  which  inevitably  
causes  harm to the listeners  (of the imam's  sermon).  For this reason,  he should  
keep silent. One should  not also sit in the ring-shaped  gathering  of those  who  
speak  (during  the sermon).  If one fails to listen  while  being  far (from  the imam),  
let him then keep silent  for silence  is desirable  (since  it enables  all to hear  well).  If 
it is undesirable  to offer  prayer  during  the time the imam  is delivering  his sermon  
it is then more undesirable  to talk at that time. According  to All "Might  Allal  
honour  him": "It is undesirable  to offer prayer  at four times (of the day): just 
after Fajr prayer,  after Asr prayer,  at exacdy  midday,  and during  the time the 
imam  is delivering  the sermon  of Friday."
The ninth:  let him observe,  in following  the imam  on Friday  congregation,  
the same conditions  applicable  to the other  prayers  as we've mentioned  earlier.  
When  he hears the recitation  of the imam,  he should  not recite more than Al- 
Fatihah.  When  the imam  finishes  from the Friday  prayer,  let him recite,  before  he 
speaks  with anyone,  "Praise  be to Allah"  seven  times,  "Say: 'He is Allah,  the One  
and Only..."  and both Surahs  of seeking  refuge  (with Allah from Satan)  seven  
times.  According  to one of the ancient  righteous  men: "If one recites  that, he will 
be safeguarded  (from  any harm)  from the current  Friday  to the next Friday,  and 
this will act as protection  for him from  Satan."  It is strongly  desirable  to say after  
the Friday  prayer:  "O Allah,  Free of want, Praiseworthy,  the Creator  from the 
very beginning,  and the Restorer  (of life), Most  Merciful,  Full of kind-affection:  
make me independent  with what You have made lawful  from what You have  
made  unlawful,  and (satisfy  me) with Your  Bounty  from anything  else." It is said 
that if one supplicates  with that invocation  regularly,  Allah Almighty  will make  
him independent  from  anyone  of His creatures,  and provide  him with sustenance  
from sources  which  he expects  not.
After  the Friday  congregation,  let one pray six rak'ahs  (as supererogatory).353


Page 356:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
In this issue,  it is unanimously  narrated  on the authority  of Ibn Umar  that the 
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" used to offer a two-rak'ah  prayer  
after Friday  congregation.  But he "Peace  be upon him" exhorted  people  to 
offer four rak'ahs  according  to the narration  (of Muslim)  on the authority  of 
Abu Hurairah,  and six according  to the narration  (of Al-Baihaqi)  on the 
authority  of both Ali and Abdullah  Ibn Abbas.  However,  all are right, in 
accordance  with the different  states,  even though  the greatest  in number  is 
much  better.
The tenth:  let him stick to the mosque  until he offers  Asr prayer;  and if he 
remains  in the mosque  until he offers  Maghrib  prayer,  he will be more  excellent.  
It is said that he, who offers  Asr prayer  in congregation  in the mosque,  will have  
the reward  of Hajj; and he, who (remains  in the mosque  until he) offers  Maghrib  
prayer  in it will have the reward  of both  Hajj and Umrah.  But, if he does not feel 
secure  against  the possibility  of affecting  goodly  way, or being  afflicted  or given  
to harm,  because  of the people's  looking  upon  his solitude,  or if he is afraid  that 
he might  be involved  in discourse  about  that which  is not of his business,  let him 
return  home safely  and peacefully,  celebrating  (the Praises  of) Allah Almighty,  
considering  His Graces,  thanking  Allah Almighty  for granting  him success,  
fearing  of his indulgence,  watching  both his heart and tongue  until sunset,  in 
order  not to miss the exalted  hour (in which  the invocation  receives  answer  from  
Allah).
Let not him further  be involved  in talks about the affairs of this world,  
whether  in the gathering  mosque  or anywhere  else (on that day). (It is narrated  by 
Al-Baihaqi  on the authority  of Al-Hassan,  and Al-Hakim  on the authority  of 
Anas,  and Ibn Hibban  on the authority  of Ibn Umar  that) the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "A time will come upon my 
people,  in which the affairs of their world will constitute  their talks in the 
mosques:  sit not in their company,  for Allah Almighty  is not in need of their  
(religious  service)."
The Exposition  Of Further  Manners  Outside  This Sequence
Those  cover  the whole  day, and they consist  of seven  things:
The first:  let him attend  the gatherings  of knowledge  either  in the morning  or 
in the afternoon,  but let not him attend  the gatherings  of storytellers,  since there  
is no good in their speech.  The follower  of the path should  not keep himself  
during  the whole day of Friday,  far from doing good, and invoking  Allah  
Almighty,  perchance  the exalted  hour (in which  the invocation  receives  answer)  
should  come  upon  him while  being  in good.  Furthermore,  let not him attend  the 
ring-shaped  gatherings  before  the prayer,  for it is narrated  (by Abu Dawud,  An- 
Nasa'i  and Ibn Majah)  on the authority  of Abdullah  Ibn Umar  that the Messenger  
of Allah "Peace  be upon him" forbade  sitting  in ring-shaped  gatherings  in the 
mosque  before  the prayer  on Friday.
But in the case of a gathering  of Allah's  knowledge  which  reminds  of Allah's  
Days,  and instructs  in Allah's  religion,  to be held in the morning  in the mosque,354


Page 357:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
there  is no harm  for one to sit therein;  and in this way he will combine  both the 
earliness  of going  to the mosque,  and listening  to knowledge.  To be sure, to listen  
to an item of knowledge  which  of benefit  in the hereafter  is much  better  for one 
than to be engaged  in the supererogatory  deeds.  According  to the narration  on 
the authority  of Abu Dharr,  the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  him" said:  
"To attend a gathering  of knowledge  is much better than to offer a 
supererogatory  prayer  of one thousand  rak'ahs."
In comment  on Allah's  saying:  " And when  the Prayer  is finished,  then may  
you disperse  through  the land, and seek of the Bounty  of Allah:  and celebrate  
the Praises  of Allah often (and without  stint): that you may prosper"  (Al- 
Jumu'ah  10)
A Cf3 Oy>x^i I^5^41)1  IjjTilj  (J* ^' <4 SjJUaJl
Anas Ibn Malik  said: "This  does not mean  to seek the worldly  benefits,  but it 
means  to (do such deeds as to) visit a patient  to enquire  about  his health,  to 
attend  a funeral  procession,  to learn  an item of knowledge,  or to visit a brother  in 
(the religion  of) Allah Almighty."  Allah Almighty  gives knowledge  the name of 
grace  in many  location  of the Qur'an.  He says: " and taught  you what  you knew  
not (before):  and great  is the Grace  of Allah  unto  you." (An-Nisa  113)
{ 0 iliii.  i-Qi  -oil ^  JZ -J didpj  >355
liji >
He further  says: "We bestowed  Grace  Aforetime  on David  from ourselves."  
(Sheba  10)
('ff^ ^Ly-ai lL* iLijI  A JJiJj ♦ ^
Of a surety  He refers  to knowledge.  To learn  and teach  knowledge  on that day 
is from  amongst  the most  excellent  religious  services.
But to offer  supererogatory  prayer  is much  better  than to attend  the gatherings  
of storytellers,  which  they thought  to be an innovation;  and this led them  to drive  
such storytellers  out of the mosque.  Once,  Ibn Umar went very early in the 
morning  to his gathering  in the mosque,  and behold!  There  was a storyteller  
sitting  in his place.  He asked  him to stand from his place,  thereupon  he said: "I 
will not stand since I sat and preceded  you to it." Ibn Umar summoned  the 
policeman  who drove  him out of the mosque.  Had storytelling  been out of the 
right way of sunnah,  it would  have been impermissible  to make  him stand from  
his sitting  place.
(It is unanimously  narrated  on the authority  of Ibn Umar  that) the Messenger  
of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "Let none of you make his brother  stand  
from  his place  in order  to sit therein  instead  of him, but you ’d rather  come  closer  
to each other  and leave spaces  (for your brother  to sit beside  you)."  Ibn Umar  
himself  was in the habit not to sit in a place from which  a man stood  for him 
until he should  return  to it. it is narrated  that a storyteller  used to sit in the 
courtyard  of the dwelling  place of A'ishah,  thereupon  she sent to Ibn Umar  
saying:  "This  man has caused  harm  to me with his stories,  and diverted  me from


Page 358:
356 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
my supererogatory  prayers."  Ibn Umar  beat him severely  until he broke  his stick  
on his back and then drove  him away.
The second:  he should  be a well-watcher  of the exalted  hour (in which  the 
invocation  receives  answer).  It is narrated  (by Ibn Majah)  on the authority  of Amr  
Ibn Awf  Al-Muzani  that the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be 
upon  him” said: “On Friday,  there  is an hour of the day, and no Muslim  servant  
happens  to agree  with  it and asks Allah  Almighty  to give him anything  but that he 
will be given  it.” according  to another  version  "No Muslim  servant  happens  to 
agree with it during  his prayer  and asks Allah for anything  but that he will be 
given  it." there is difference  about  its exact time. It is said to be at the time of 
sunrise,  or at the time of sun decline,  or at the time of pronouncing  the Call to 
prayer,  or at the time of the imam's  ascent  to the pulpit,  and going  on delivering  
his sermon,  or at the time the people  stand to assume  the prayer,  or at the last 
portion  of the time of afternoon,  or a short  time before  sunset;  and it is exactly  
that time which  Fatimah  "Allah  be pleased  with her" (daughter  of the Prophet)  
used to observe:  she used to tell her servant-maid  to watch  the sun for her, and 
inform  her of its fall, thereupon  she would  go on invoking  and asking  for Allah's  
Forgiveness  until the sun would  set. She related  from her father  that this is the 
expected  hour  (in which  the invocation  receives  answer  from  Allah).
According  to some  learned  men of knowledge,  the exact time of this hour is 
unidentified,  and it might  happen  at any portion  of the day, like the night of 
Power,  which  should  be watched.  But it is also said that it moves  about  across  all 
the hours  of Friday,  the same  as does the night  of Power  (across  the last ten days  
of Ramadan),  and this is the most fitting  to be right. It has a mystery,  which  is 
not fitting  to be mentioned  in this science  of practical  religion.  But it might  be 
confirmed  by the narration  (of At-Tabarani  on the authority  of Muhammad  Ibn 
Maslamah,  Ibn Abd Al-Barr  on the authority  of Anas,  and Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya  
on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that) he "Peace  be upon  him" said: "Your  Lord  
has so many  gifts therewith  He provides  you (from time to time) across  your  
days: so, expose  yourselves  to His gifts."  However,  Friday  is one of those  days,  
so, the servant  should  be, during  the whole  day, exposed  to that by stimulating  
the heart to be attentive,  sticking  to the celebration  (of the Praises  of Allah),  
refraining  from the evil suggestions  of this world,  perchance  he would  obtain  
anything  of those  gifts.
It is narrated  by Abu Dawud,  Ibn Majah  and An-Nasa'i  that Ka'b Al-Ahbar  
said (to Abu Hurairah):  “It is the last hour of Friday,  i.e. at the time of sunset. ” 
He said to him: “How  should  it be the last hour  of Friday,  since  the Messenger  of 
Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him” said: “And no Muslim  servant  
agrees  with it while  being  in prayer... ” and there  is no prayer  to be offered  at the 
last hour. ” On that he said: “Is it not that the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s 
blessing  and peace be upon him” said: “He, who sits in a certain  place in 
expectation  for the coming  prayer,  is considered  to be in prayer ”. He said: “Yes. ” 
He said: “This is what  is intended  here. ” Abu Hurairah  then kept silent.  Ka'b was 
of the opinion  that it is (no more than) a mercy  from Allah  which  He bestows


Page 359:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
upon those  who undertake  the duties  of this day as it should  be, and the exact  
time of its bestowal  is just on finishing  from the deed. In short, this time is 
exalted,  besides  that of the imam's  ascent  to the pulpit:  so, let one invoke  Allah  
so much  in both times.
The third:  let one invoke  Allah's  prayer  and blessing  upon  the Messenger  of 
Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him” so much on that day,  
(depending  upon the narration  of Ad-Daraqatni  on the authority  of Sa'id Ibn 
Al-Musayyab  from Abu Hurairah  in which)  the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s 
blessing  and peace be upon him” said: "He, who invokes  Allah's  prayer  and 
blessing  upon me on Friday  eighty  times,  Allah  will forgive  for him the sins of 
eighty  years."  It was said: "O Messenger  of Allah! How should  one invoke  
Allah's  prayer  upon you?" the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  
be upon him” said: "It is to say: 'O Allah!  Send  Your  Prayer  and Blessing  upon  
Muhammad,  Your  Servant,  Prophet  and Messenger,  i.e. the unlettered  Prophet'  
and count  one." But it will be better  to say seven  times: "O Allah!  Send Your  
prayer  and blessing  upon Muhammad  and upon the family  of Muhammad,  in 
such a way as to be a cause  of obtaining  Your  Good  Pleasure,  fulfilling  his (the 
Prophet's)  right (upon  us), and give him the access  (to intercession),  and raise  
him to the high praiseworthy  station  which  You've  promised  him, and reward  
him on behalf  of us as much  as is fitting  for his position,  and reward  him in the 
best way You've  rewarded  a Prophet  on behalf  of his nation,  and send Your  
prayer  and blessing  upon  him, as well as upon  all of his brothers,  from  amongst  
the Prophets  and Messengers,  and the righteous:  You are the Most  Merciful  of 
those  who are merciful."  It is said that if one says it along  seven  Fridays,  seven  
times  on each,  his (the Prophet's)  intercession  will be assured  to him.
If one likes to do more,  let him recite  the traditional  invocation  which  goes as 
follows:  "O Allah! Cause the excellence  of Your blessing,  Your growing  
benefactions  and the honour  of Your benevolences,  mercy  and felicitation  to 
come  upon Muhammad,  who is the chief  of all of the Messengers,  the leader  of 
the Allah-fearing  (among  the people),  the Seal of the Prophets,  the Messenger  of 
the Cherisher  and Sustainer  of the worlds,  the Captain  of Good and the 
Conqueror  of Righteousness,  the Prophet  of Mercy  and the Chief  or the People.  
O Allah!  Raise  him to a station  of glory  through  which  he advances  in nearness  
and by which  his eye is cooled  and on account  of which the first and the last 
emulate  him without  envy. O Allah!  Give him favour,  excellence,  honour,  access,  
the exalted  degree  and the lofty,  overtopping  position.  O Allah!  Give  Muhammad  
his request,  make  him attain  his hope,  make  him the first intercessor,  and the first 
of those  whose  intercession  is successful.  O Allah,  make clear his proof,  weigh  
down  his balance,  make effective  his argument,  and exalt his degree  among  the 
highest  of Your nearest  devotees.  O Allah,  assemble  us in his party  and include  
us among  the people  of his intercession!  Make  us live according  to his right way 
of sunnah,  and cause us to die according  to his religion,  and bring us to his 
Fountain-Lake,  and let us drink in his cup, unashamed,  not regretting,  not357


Page 360:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
doubting,  not changing,  not trying  others,  and not tried! Amen  O Lord of the 
Worlds!"
In short,  whatever  words  one might  use in his invoking  Allah's  prayer  and 
blessing  upon the Prophet,  and even if it is the famous  one recited  in the 
testification,  he will have invoked  for Allah's  prayer and blessing  upon the 
Prophet  but, let him add to it his asking  for Allah's  Forgiveness,  since it is 
desirable  on that day.
The fourth:  it relates  to the Recital  of the Qur'an.  So let him recite  so much  
of it. Let him recite the Surah of Al-Kahf  (the Cave) in particular,  for it is 
transmitted  (even though  this narration  is unidentified)  on the authority  of Ibn 
Abbas  and Abu Hurairah  tracing  it back  to the Prophet  "Peace  be upon  him" that 
"He who recites  the Surah  of Al-Kahf  on the eve of Friday  or on Friday  will be 
given  a light from  where  he recites  it to Mecca,  and he will be forgiven  until the 
next Friday,  in addition  to three days besides,  and seventy  thousand  angels  will 
invoke  Allah's  prayer  and blessing  upon  him until morning  enters  upon  him and 
he will further  be saved from illness,  the stomach  trouble,  pleurisy,  leprosy,  
elephantiasis  and the affliction  of the Antichrist.
It is desirable  for him to conclude  his recital  of the Qur'an  on Friday  and the 
eve of Friday,  if it is possible  for him, and let such conclusion  of the Qur'an  be in 
the two rak'ahs  of the Fajr prayer  if he has been reciting  at night,  or in the two 
rak'ahs  of the Maghrib  prayer,  or in the interval  between  the Call to prayer  and 
the establishment  of the Friday  prayer,  for it has great excellence.  The righteous  
worshippers  were  inclined  to recite  the Surah  of "Say: "He is Allah,  the One and 
Only'"  one thousand  times on Friday;  and it is said that reciting  it along  ten or 
twenty  rak'ahs  is better  than an entire  recital  of the Qur'an.  They also used to 
invoke  Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon the Prophet  "Peace  be upon  him" one 
thousand  times,  to say Exalted  be Allah,  Praise  be to Allah,  there  is no god (to be 
worshipped)  but Allah,  and Allah is Greater"  one thousand  times.  If he recites  
the six Praises  on Friday  or the eve of Friday  it is well. It is not narrated  from  the 
Prophet  "Peace  be upon  him" that he was in the habit  of reciting  certain  Surahs  in 
total  except  on Friday,  and on the eve of Friday.  He used to recite  at the Maghrib  
prayer  of Friday  evening,  "Say, O you who reject  faith!"  and "Say, 'He is Allah,  
the One and Only!".  He used to recite  in the Isha' prayer  of Friday,  the Surah  of 
Al-Jumu'ah  and Al-Munafiqun.  It is narrated  that he used to recite  them  both in 
the two rak'ahs  of the Friday  congregation.  He used to recite in the Morning  
prayer  of Friday  both  Surahs  of Luqman  and Al-Insan.
The fifth:  it pertains  to the supererogatory  prayers.  It is desirable,  on entering  
the mosque,  to pray four rak'ahs,  with the recital  of "Say: 'He is Allah,  the One  
and Only'" two hundred  times, i.e. fifty in each rak'ah. In this respect,  it is 
narrated  (by Al-Khatib  on the authority  of Ibn Umar) that the Messenger  of 
Allah "Peace  be upon him" told that whoever  did so would  not die until he 
should  see his seat in the Garden,  or until it should  be seen for him (by others),  
let not him also leave the two-rak'ah  prayer  of greeting  the mosque,  even if the 
imam  is delivering  his sermon,  but he should  rather  make  them  short.  However,358
l


Page 361:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
it is the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" who issued  this command.  
According  to a strange  narration,  once the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  
him" kept silent for the one who entered  (the mosque)  until he prayed  them.  
According  to the Kufis,  if the imam  keeps silent for him, he then should  pray  
them.359
It is desirable,  on that day or on its eve, to offer  a four-rak'ah  prayer  with  
the help of four Surahs:  Al-An'am,  Al-Kahf,  Ta ha, and Ya Sin. But in case he 
could not recite them well, let him substitute  for them the Surahs  of Ya Sin, 
Luqman,  Ad-Dukhan  and Al-Mulk.  But let not him leave reciting  those four  
Surahs  on the night  of Friday,  for their excellence  is very great.  Whoever  cannot  
recite them well should  then recite what he can do well, and it is equal to an 
entire  recital  of the Qur'an  for him. He should  recite  so much  the Surah  of Al- 
Ikhlas.  It is desirable  to offer  the prayer  of Tasbih,  according  to the way that will 
be discussed  in the Chapter  on the Voluntary  prayers,  for it is narrated  that the 
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" told his uncle Al-Abbas  to pray it on 
every Friday.  Ibn Abbas  was eager not to leave offering  this prayer  on Friday  
after the sun decline,  and he told of the magnificence  of its excellence.  It is better  
to devote  one's  time up to the sun decline  to the prayer  itself,  and the period  after  
the Friday  congregation  up to mid-afternoon  to the listening  to knowledge,  and 
after  that up to sunset  to Praising  and Asking  for Allah's  Forgiveness.
The sixth:  giving  alms is desirable  so much  on that day in particular,  and its 
reward  is multiplied  many  times,  with the exception  of him, who begs during  the 
imam's sermon,  and interrupts  his speech,  for indeed,  this is undesirable.  
According  to Salih Ibn Muhammad:  A needy  indigent  begged  (the people  on 
Friday  congregation)  while the imam was delivering  his sermon,  and he was 
sitting  by the side of my father.  A man gave my father  a fragment  to convey  it to 
him, but my father  rejected  to take it. according  to Ibn Mas'ud:  "If a man begs  
the people  in the mosque,  he will not deserve  to be given;  and if somebody  begs  
the people  in return for his recital of the Qur'an,  give him nothing."  Some  
learned  men disliked  to give alms to those  who beg in a mosque,  wherein  they  
step over  the necks  of the people,  unless  one begs while  standing  or sitting  in his 
place,  without  passing  over  the necks  of others.
Ka'b Al-Ahbar  said: "He, who attends  the Friday  congregation  and then turns  
away  and gives a pair of different  things  as alms,  and then returns  and performs  
two rak'ahs,  making  perfect  their  Bowings,  Prostrations  and submission,  and then  
says: 'O Allah!  I ask You by Your  name,  in the name of Allah,  Most Gracious,  
Most  Merciful,  and in Your  Name,  besides  Whom  there is no God, the Living,  
the Self- Existing,  whom  neither  slumber  nor sleep takes',  does not ask Allah  
anything  but that He will give it to him."  According  to one of the early  righteous  
men: "If one feeds  an indigent  on Friday,  and then  goes  very early  in the morning  
(to attend  the Friday  congregation),  and causes  no harm to anyone,  and says,  
once the imam  utters  the End Salutation:  "In the Name  of Allah,  Most  Gracious,  
Most Merciful,  Ever-Living,  Self-Subsisting,  Eternal:  I ask You to forgive  me, 
bestow  mercy  upon me, and rescue me from the fire (of Hell)",  and then


Page 362:
360 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
supplicates  him with whichever  invocations  seems  to him, it will receive  answer  
from  Him."
The seventh:  let one specify  Friday  only to the hereafter,  on which  he should  
refrain  from  any of the worldly  matters  and affairs,  and rather  address  himself  so 
much to the devotional  recitals  of litanies  (and sections  from the Qur'an  and 
celebrations).  Furthermore,  let not him begin any journey  (he intends  to make)  
on that day, for it is narrated  that he, who sets out on journey  on the night  of 
Friday,  his two accompanying  angels invokes  evil upon him. However,  it is 
forbidden  if it is to start just after  dawn,  unless  one will miss the company  of the 
fellow-travellers.  It is disliked,  according  to an early man, to buy water  from the 
water-carrier  in the mosque,  for the purpose  of drinking  or donating  it to the 
wayfarers,  in order  not to be sold in the mosque  itself,  in which  it is undesirable  
to practice  transaction.  But they are of the opinion  that there  is no harm (to buy 
it and) give a bit (of money,  i.e. its price)  outside  the mosque  and then bring  it to 
be taken or donated  to the wayfarers  in the mosque.  In short, one should,  on 
Friday,  do much of his litanies  and good deeds,  for indeed,  if Allah Almighty  
loves  anyone  of His servants,  He will engage  him, in the meritorious  times,  in the 
most excellent  deeds,  and if He dislikes  a servant,  He will engage  him, in the 
meritorious  times,  in the worst deeds,  in order to make his punishment  more  
painful,  and his aversion  more  intensive,  through  depriving  him of the blessing  of 
the time,  and causing  him to violate  its inviolability.  On the other  hand,  there  are 
many supplication,  which  are desirable  on Friday  in particular,  and they will be 
mentioned  later in the Book  of Supplications,  Allah  Willing:  and Allah's  blessing  
an peace  be upon  every  well-chosen  servant.
CHAPTER  SIX: ON THE DIFFERENT  PROBLEMS  WHICH  
CAUSE  GENERAL  DISTRESS,  OF WHICH  A DEVOTEE  NEEDS  
TO HAVE  KNOWLEDGE
As to the problems  whose  occurrence  is rare,  we've  discussed  them  in detail  in 
the books  of jurisprudence.
The Problem  of the Slight  Act: Although  it does not make valid the 
prayer,  it is undesirable,  unless  there  is need for it, such as to avert  a passers-  
by (in front  of the praying  man),  and to kill a scorpion  that one fears and can 
kill with one or two blows,  but when they are three,  they become  too many,  
and thus invalidate  the prayer,  likewise  one may avert from himself  a louse  
and a flea, once he is harmed  by them;  and the same is true of his need of 
scratching,  which  disturbs  him from submissiveness.  Mu'adh  used to catch a 
louse  and a flea during  the prayer,  and Ibn Umar  used to kill a louse  and a flea 
during  the prayer,  to the extent  that the blood  would  appear  on his hand.  
According  to An-Nakh'i:  "One could catch and disable  it and there is no 
blame  against  him if he kills it." According  to Ibn Al-Musayyab  : "He could  
take and benumbs  it and then throws  it down."  According  to Mujahid:  "The  
dearest  to me is to let it alone unless  it harms  him, and diverts  him from his


Page 363:
Book  four: The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
prayer:  in this case, one should  disable  it enough  so as to cause no harm to 
him and then throw  it away."
This is only a concession,  otherwise  it is out of perfection  to guard  against  the 
action,  no matter  slight  it might  be. In this connection,  one of them  was used not 
to drive away a fly, for he said: "I will not accustom  myself  to that (act), lest it 
would  corrupt  my prayer  for me, recalling  in memory  what I heard about the 
wicked  who are patient  before  kings under  great suffering,  and do not move."  
When  one yawns,  there is no harm  in putting  his hand over his mouth,  which  is 
preferable.  If he sneezes  let him praise Allah in himself,  without  moving  his 
tongue.  If he belches,  let not him raise his head up towards  the sky. If his 
garment  falls down,  let not him set it right,  and let him do so with the ends of his 
turban,  for all of that is undesirable,  unless  it is necessary.
The problem  of praying  in sandals:  it is permissible,  although  putting  off 
both sandals  is very easy. However,  it is not for the difficulty  of taking  off both  
footwears  that there is concession  (to perform  ablution  in them),  but for the fact 
that this kind of filth is pardonable.  The same applies  to the leather  socks.  It is 
narrated  (by Ahmad,  Abu Dawud,  Ibn Majah  and Al-Hakim  on the authority  of 
Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri)  that the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" offered  
prayer  (at first) in his sandals,  and then he took them off, with the result  that the 
people  also took off theirs. He asked them: "Why have you taken off your  
sandals  (in prayer)?"  they said: "We saw you having  taken off yours,  and thus  
we've  taken  off ours."  On that he "Peace  be upon  him" said: "Gabriel  "Peace  b< 
upon  him" came  to me and told me that there  was filth in them.  So, if anyone  o 
you intends  to enter die mosque  (in his sandals),  let him turn his sandals,  and 
catch  a glimpse  of them:  if there  is filth in them,  let him rub it against  the earth,  
and then offer  prayer  in them."
According  to somebody,  to offer  prayer  in both sandals  is more  excellent,  for 
the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" asked  them: "Why  have you taken  
off your sandals?"  but this is exaggeration,  for the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be 
upon  him" asked  them  only to show  to them  the reason  for which  he took  off his 
sandals,  knowing  that they did only in conformity  with his act. According  to the 
narration  (of Muslim)  on the authority  of Abdullah  Ibn As-Sa'ib,  the Messenger  
of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" took off his sandals  in prayer.  Thus,  as long as he 
"Peace  be upon  him" did both,  (there  is no harm  either  to put on or put off them  
in prayer).  But, if one takes them  off, let not him put them  on his right  nor on his 
left side, lest the praying  place would  become  narrow,  and the row (of praying  
men)  would  be interrupted.
He then should  place them in between  his legs, but not behind  him, lest his 
attention  would  be diverted  to them during  die prayer.  It seem that those  who  
see it better  to offer prayer  in sandals  observe  this notion,  i.e. one's attention  
might  be diverted  to them (during  the prayer).  In this context,  it is narrated  (by 
Abu Dawud)  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  "Allah  be pleased  with him" that 
the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "If anyone  of you prays (and  
choose  to leave his sandals  during  the prayer),  let him place them  in between  his361


Page 364:
362 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
legs." Abu Hurairah  himself  said to another  man: "Place  them in between  your  
legs, and cause  no harm  to a Muslim  by them."  but (according  to the narration  of 
Muslim  on the authority  of Abdullah  Ibn As-Sa'ib)  the Messenger  of Allah  
"Peace  be upon him" placed  his sandals  on his left side. However,  he did so 
because  he was the imam,  and the imam  has the right  to put them  on his left side,  
since none stands  on his left. It is more fitting  not to place them in between  his 
legs, lest they would  divert  his attention.  But rather  let them in front  of his feet;  
and perhaps  this is what is intended  by the narration.  According  to Jubair  Ibn 
Mut'im:  "Putting  one's  sandals  in between  his feet is an innovation."
A problem:  if one spits during  the prayer,  his prayer  will not be invalid,  for 
it is considered  a slight  act, and what  produces  no sound  could,  by no means  be 
regarded  as speech,  as well as it does not appear  in the form  of letters.  But it is 
undesirable.  So, it should  be avoided,  except  in accordance  with the way that is 
permitted  by the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him". It is narrated  (by 
Muslim,  Abu Dawud  and others on the authority  of jabir that) once, the 
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" saw a sputum  on the wall of the 
direction  of the Qiblah  of the mosque,  which  provoked  his anger  severely,  and 
he came  and removed  it with the lower  part of date-stalk.  Then  he said: “Bring  
me (any kind of) scent. ” And the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and 
peace  be upon him” smeared  the traces  of the sputum  with saffron.  Then,  he 
turned  his face to us and said: “Which  of you is pleased  to have somebody  spit 
in his face?"  we said: "No one." On that he resumed:  "When  anyone  of you is 
in prayer,  Allah  Almighty  becomes  between  him and the Qiblah,  (or according  
to another  version,  he, indeed,  faces  his Lord  Almighty).  So, let not him spit on 
his right,  nor in front  of him, but, (if it is necessary  for him to spit) let him spit 
on his left or under  his (left) foot; and in case he is in urgent  need to do, let him 
spit in his garment,  and do with it as such."  He then rubbed  its parts  with each  
other.
A problem:  there are two points  for the standing  of the one led in prayer:  
one in accordance  with the tradition,  and the other in accordance  with the 
obligation.  As far as the point of tradition  is concerned,  the individual  (who  
prays  alone  behind  the imam)  should  stand  on his right,  drawn  back from him a 
little, and the woman  should  stand behind  the imam.  But if she stands  by the 
side of the imam,  it will not be harmful,  although  she will have contradicted  the 
tradition.  In case there is a man besides  her, let him stand by the right side of 
the imam,  drawn back from him a little, and the woman  behind  that man.  
Furthermore,  let none stand  alone  behind  the row, but rather  let him enter  into 
the row, or (if it is difficult)  draw somebody  from the row to him (to stand  
beside  him). It is true that his standing  alone  does not invalidate  his prayer,  but 
it is undesirable.
As far as the point  of obligation  is concerned,  it pertains  to the continuity  of 
the row, i.e. to have a connection  which  joins both the imam  and the one led in 
prayer,  since both are in a congregation.  If they are praying  in a mosque,  it 
suffices  for a joining  connection,  for it has been constructed  for that, and in this


Page 365:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
case, there is no need for the connection  of the row so much as for the 
recognition  of the imam's  acts. It is related  that Abu Hurairah  prayed  on the roof  
of the mosque  with the prayer  of the imam  (within  the mosque).  But if one led in 
prayer  prays in the front of the mosque,  in an adjacent  roadway  or open space  
and there is no obstacle  of structure  to separate  them, the nearness  of the 
measure  of an arrow's bowshot  distance  is sufficient.  There is sufficient  
connection  in prayer  as long as the act of one of them  reaches  the other.  But the 
continuity  of the row is stipulated  only when one stands  in the courtyard  of a 
house  on the right or the left of the mosque,  with its door open to the mosque,  
and the condition  in this case is that the row of the mosque  should  extend  to the 
inside  of the courtyard's  passageway,  without  a break,  to such courtyard.  Then  
the prayer  of the one who is in that row and what  is behind  it is valid,  but not the 
prayer  of the one who is in front  of it. This is the rule of the separated  buildings.  
But as for a single building  and a single court,  they are like an open space (in 
which  no row continuity  is stipulated).
A problem:  When  the late-comer  arrives  at the time the imam  is in the last 
portion  of his prayer,  let him consider  it the first portion  of his prayer.  So let him 
come  into agreement  with the imam, and build upon that, and let him recite the 
Quntit  Supplication  in the morning  at the last portion  of his own prayer,  even  
though  he has recited  the Qiinut  Supplication  in the morning  at the last portion  of 
his own prayer,  even though  he has recited  the Onmit  Supplication,  along  with the 
imam.  If he in time joins a part of the Standing  Posture  along  with the imam, let 
not him engage  himself  in the Supplication,  but rather  let him begin with the 
Fatihah,  and let him do it quickly.  Then,  if the imam  does the Bowing  before  h» 
finishes  the Fatihah,  and he is able to catch up with him a short  while  before  hit 
rising from the Bowing,  let him finish it. But if he is unable,  let him come into 
accord  with the imam and bows when he does. A part of the Fatihah  has the 
authority  of the whole  of it, so the Fatihah  falls away from him because  of their  
going  ahead of him. If the imam bows while he is in the midst of reciting  the 
Surah  let him break  it off.
If he catches  up with the imam  in the prostration  posture  or in the sitting  for 
testification,  let him utter the Takhir  of assuming  the prayer,  and sit, without  uttering  
the Takhir  of transitions,  unlike  the case when  he catches  up with the imam  in the 
Bowing,  for he utters  the Takhir  for the second  time in the bending  over because  
that is a transition  reckoned  for him, and the Takhirs  are for the original  
transitions,  not for incidents  in the prayer  on account  of following  the imam  on 
the part of the late-comer.  But he will not be considered  to have caught  up with  
the rak'ah  unless  he does not feel at ease in that position  of bowing  while the 
imam  is still within  the time limit of those  bowing  with him. Yet, if his feeling  at 
ease in the position  of bowing  is not complete  until after the imam  has passed  out 
of the time limit  of those  bowing,  that rak'ah  mil be regarded  to have escaped  him.
A problem:  Let him whom  the Zhuhr  prayer  escapes  up to the time of Asr 
prayer  perform  the Zhuhr  prayer  first, and then the Asr. But if he begins  with the 
Asr prayer,  that may do, but in this case he will have left what is preferred,  and363


Page 366:
364 The quarter  of the acts of worship
come  under  the risk of disagreement.  However,  if he finds an w;aw  to follow,  let 
him offer  the Asr prayer  and then offer  the Zhuhr  prayer  after  it. of a surety,  the 
Congregational  prayer  has more  claim to be offered  first. But if he offers  prayer  
individually  in the early portion  of the time, and then catches  up with the 
Congregational  prayer,  let him offer prayer  in the congregation,  and state the 
Intention  of the prayer  of the time, and Allah  will take account  of whichever  He 
wills.  But if he states  the Intention  of a prayer  that has escaped,  or of a Voluntary  
prayer,  it is permissible.  If he has just offered  a prayer  in congregation,  after  
which  he catches  up with another  congregation,  let him state the Intention  of a 
prayer  that has escaped,  or a Supererogatory  prayer,  for there is no point to 
repeat  a prayer  which  has been fulfilled  in the congregation,  even though  it is 
acceptable  only for the sake of assuring  the excellence  of Congregational  prayer.
A problem:  If one offered  prayer  and then saw filth on his garment,  it is more  
desirable  to offer prayer  in lieu of it, even though  it is not binding  upon  him. If 
he sees the filth on his garment  during  the prayer,  let him throw  it away, and 
complete  his prayer;  and it is desirable  to restart  it. the reference  of that is the 
story or removing  both sandals,  when Gabriel  "Peace  be upon him" told the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" that they had filth  
on them,  thereupon  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" did not restart  the prayer.
A problem:  If one leaves  the first testification,  or the Qunut  supplication,  or 
the invocation  of Allah's  prayer  and blessing  upon the Prophet,  or forgetfully  
does any act of those  which  might  invalidate  the prayer  when  done  intentionally,  
or has suspicion  as to how much  he has prayed,  whether  three or four, let him 
depend  upon what is (closer to) certainty,  and offer both prostrations  of 
forgetfulness  before the End Salutation.  But if he forgets to offer such  
prostrations,  let him offer them after the End Salutation,  whenever  he 
remembers,  as near (unto  the time of prayer)  as it could  be. But if he offers  those  
prostrations  after the End Salutation,  and after he had broken  his ablution,  his 
prayer  will have been  invalid,  for when  he enters  into the state of prostration,  he 
seems  as if he has made his End Salutation  out of place through  forgetfulness,  
with which  he could  not dissolve  from the prayer,  and rather  he might  return  to 
the prayer;  and for this reason,  he should  restart  the End Salutation  after both  
prostrations.  In case he remembers  both prostrations  of forgetfulness  after his 
leaving  the mosque,  or after a long time which has separated  him from the 
current  prayer,  it will have escaped  him.
A problem:  It pertains  to the evil Suggestion  which  befalls  one during  the Intention  to 
offer  prayer.  It results  from  mental  disorder,  or from  ignorance  of the religious  law. 
That's  because  to submit  to Allah's  command  is likely the same as to submit  to 
the command  of anyone  else, and to glorify  His is likely the same as to glorify  
anyone  else, in so far as the purpose  is concerned.  Anyone  whom  a learned  man  
visits stands up (to show respect)  for him. Then has he to say: "I have the 
intention  to rise and stand,  in exaltation  of the entrance  of the honourable  Zaid,  
on account  of his excellence,  synchronizing  my action  with his entrance,  turning


Page 367:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer
to him with my face" he would  be weak-minded.  Nay,  but in accordance  with the 
way in which he sees him, and as much as he becomes  well-aware  of his 
excellence,  the desire  for magnification  rises in him of itself,  and stimulates  him 
to stand up, and he becomes  a magnifier,  except  when he rises for another  
occupation,  or rises in a state of heedlessness.
The Stipulation  for the prayer  to be "Zhuhr"  "an obligatory  fulfillment  of 
obligation"  so that the obedience  may be perfect,  is like the stipulation  for the 
standing  of the host to be synchronous  with the entrance  of the learned  man,  
along  with facing  the one coming  in, and along  with the absence  of any motive  
else other  than that, and joined  with the purpose  of glorifying  Him by means  of 
the standing  up, in order that the standing  up may be magnification.  For, if he 
were to stand up, turning  his back, or wait and then stand up after a while,  he 
would  not be a magnifier.
Then, these qualities  are required  to be known and intended  by the 
worshipper.  However,  there presence  in the self does not last no longer  than a 
single  moment,  but only setting  the order  of wording  which  indicate  them lasts  
longer,  be it uttering  them by the tongue  or thinking  of them  with the mind.  So, 
he, who understands  not the Intention  of the prayer  as such,  does not understand  
what intention  really  is. For it has nothing  more than that you were invited  to 
offer prayer  at a certain  time, and you responded  accordingly  and stood up to 
offer  it. So, distraction  of mind through  evil suggestions  (coming  from the devil)  
is absolute  ignorance,  for these purposes  and kinds of knowledge  are combined  
in the self in one state, and are not separated  out in the mind into independent  
elements  in such a way that the self may go through  and consider  them,  for there  
is a difference  between  the presence  of a thing  in the self and differentiating  it in 
the thought.
Presence  is the opposite  of absence  and heedlessness,  even though  it is not 
differentiated.  For, anyone  who has knowledge  of an originated  thing, for 
example,  knows  it with one knowledge  and in one state, but this knowledge  
includes  different  kinds  of knowledge  which  are present  even though  they are not 
differentiated.  For, anyone  who has knowledge  of an originated  thing has 
knowledge  of the existent  and the non-existent,  and of coming  before and 
coming  after, and time, and knows that the coming  before  belongs  to non­
existence  and coming  after to existence.  These  kinds of knowledge  are included  
under  the knowledge  of the originated  thing,  as attested  by the fact that if anyone  
who has knowledge  of an originated  thing  and has no further  knowledge  about  it, 
says: "I have never  known  it" in reply  to the question:  "Did  you know  the coming  
before  only, or the coming  after, or non- existence,  or the coming  before  of the 
non-existence,  or the coming  after of the existence,  or time,  which  is divided  into 
past and future"  he would be a liar, and his speech  would contradict  his 
statement:  "I know  the originated  thing."
From the ignorance  of this point distraction  is aroused.  Then indeed  the 
distracted  man imposes  on himself  the task of presenting  in his heart  the fact that 
it is a noon  time act, and that it is a performance  of a duty at its prescribed  stated365


Page 368:
366 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
time, and that it is an obligation,  all in one state, differentiated  into its various  
expressions  while  he observes  them;  and of a surety,  this is absurd.  Were he to 
impose  that task on himself  in standing  up for a learned  man, it would be 
impossible  for him. So, by this knowledge,  distraction  is warded  off, that's,  simply  
to know that obedience  to the command  of Allah in the Intendon  is like 
obedience  to the command  of someone  else.
Nevertheless,  I add to it, by way of facilitation  and concession,  saying:  Were  
the one who is distracted  not to understand  what the Intention  is without  the 
presence  of these  things  separately,  and were he not to picture  within  himself  the 
obedience  all at once, and were he to present  the whole  of that during  Takhir,  
from its beginning  to its end, so that he would  not finish Takhir  before  he has 
secured  the Intention,  this would  surely  suffice  him. We would  not burden  him 
with the task of joining  the whole  of that to the beginning  or to the end of the 
Takhir ; for that would  be an excessive  burden.  Had that been commanded,  a 
question  about it would have occurred  to the first believers,  and one of the 
Companions  would  have been distracted  in the Intention.  So, the absence  of the 
occurrence  of that is a proof  that the command  is on an easy basis.  Therefore,  it 
is fitting  that the one who is distracted  should  be content  with whatever  way is 
made  easy for him, so that it may become  habitual  for him, and distraction  may  
leave  him. He should  not demand  of himself  painstaking  precision  in that, for the 
effort  to be more  precise  increases  distraction.  We have mentioned  in the Religions  
and Legal  Verdicts  son/e aspects  of the precise  requirements  in the analysis  of the 
cognitions  and purposes  connected  with the Intention,  which  the learned  men  
need to know.  But as for the laymen,  they might  be harmed  by hearing  them,  
with distractions  aroused.  For this reason,  we have relegated  them from the 
present  discussion.
A problem:  the one led in prayer  should  not precede  the imam  in bowing,  or 
prostration,  or in rising from both, or in anyone  of all the other acts of the 
prayer,  nor should  he also synchronize  his movements  with the imam's:  but, let 
him rather  follow  him, and imitate  his acts; and this is the meaning  of emulation.  
But in case he synchronize  his acts with the imam's  intentionally,  his prayer  will 
not be regarded  as invalid,  just as when  he stands  by his side, without  being  back  
from him. But if he precedes  him, there is difference  whether  his prayer  should  
or should  not be regarded  as invalid;  and it is not unlikely  to be judged  as such,  in 
comparison  with the case in which he becomes  ahead of him in position.  
However,  this (judgement  of its invalidity)  is more fitting  in view of the fact that 
the congregation  is a following  in act and not in position.  It is true then that the 
following  in act is more  important.
But the stipulation  of not becoming  ahead in position  is to facilitate  the 
following  in act, and realize  the image of following,  since it is fitting  for the 
followed  to be ahead  of the follower.  For this reason,  there  is no justification  for 
preceding  the imam  in act unless  it is done forgetfully.  So the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" strongly  criticized  him who does so, (as 
shown  from the narration  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  in which  he said):


Page 369:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer
"Does  the one who raises  his head before  the imam  not fear that Allah  Almighty  
might  turn his head  into that of a donkey?"
As for one's delay from the imam  as much  as no more  than an act, it does  
not invalidate  the prayer.  The example  of it is that the imam  takes the straight  
position  from bowing,  while the one led in prayer  has not bowed  yet. But to 
delay to such a limit is undesirable.  If the imam places  his forehead  on the 
ground  (in prostration),  while the one led in prayer  has not finished  up to the 
time limit of those  who are bowing,  his prayer  will be invalid;  and similarly,  if 
the imam places  his forehead  on the ground  for the second  prostration,  and 
the one led in prayer  has not performed  the first prostradon  (his prayer  will 
also be invalid).
A problem:  It is incumbent  upon him who attends  the prayer,  on seeing  any 
vile act or mistake  during  the prayer,  to change  it, and have strong  disapprobadon  
for its doer; and if this vile act issues from an ignorant,  he should  then behave  
gendy  towards  him, and teach him (what  is right).  This implies,  for example,  the 
order  to make  straight  the rows,  prevents  anyone  to stand  alone  outside  the row,  
to criticize  him who raises  his head before  the imam,  and the like of that. (It is 
narrated  in Al-Firdaws  (the Paradise)  on the authority  of Anas that) the 
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  him" said: "Woe  to the learned  man from the 
ignorant  if he does not instruct  him."
According  to Ibn Mas'ud  "Allah  be pleased  with him": "He, who sees anyone,  
having  committed  mistake  in his prayer  and does not forbid  him, is, to be sure,  
his partner  in its sin." According  to Bilal Ibn Sa'd: "If a mistake  is hidden,  it will 
cause  no harm but to its doer; but if it becomes  apparent  without  being  changed,  
its harm  will extend  to the public."  According  to a certain  narradon,  Bilal was in 
the habit  of making  straight  the rows to the point  of beadng  their heels with his 
sdck. It is narrated  that Umar  "Allah  be pleased  with him" said: "Search  for your  
brothers  in prayer,  and if you miss them,  then,  you should  visit them  and enquire  
about  their health  in case they are suffering  from ailment,  and if they are healthy  
(and do not attend the prayer  in congregation),  you should  remonstrate  with  
them, by expressing  disapprobadon  for leaving  the Congregational  prayer."  
However,  one should not indulge  in such remonstradon  (for leaving the 
congregational  prayer).  The early men used to go as far in that point as to carry  
the bier to him who remained  behind  the congregational  prayer,  in reference  to 
the fact that it is the dead and not die living  who would  remain  behind  the prayer  
in congregation.
When  one enters  the mosque,  let him turn directly  to the right  side of the row.  
During  the lifetime  of the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  him" the people  
forced  each other  in crowds  for the right side of the row that it was said to Kim 
(According  to the narration  of Ibn Majah  on die audiority  of Umar):  "The left 
side of the mosque  has become  idle." On that the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be 
upon him" said: "He who inhabits  the left side of the mosque  will receive  a 
double  reward."  If one finds no place in the row for himself,  and at the 
time, he finds a boy in the row, who has not yet attained  the age of puberty,  he367
same


Page 370:
368 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
might  take him out of the row and enter  the row in his place,  and turn back the 
boy.
This is what  we like to mention  of the problems,  which  cause  general  distress;  
and the rules of the separate  (supererogatory)  prayers  will be discussed  in the 
Book  of Regular  Divisions,  Allah  Willing.
CHAPTER  SEVEN:  ON THE SUPEREROGATORY  PRAYERS
It should  be known  that what is beyond  the obligatory  prayers  could be 
divided  into three categories:  the traditional  prayers;  the voluntary  prayers;  and 
the desirable  prayers.  By the traditional  prayers  we mean such of prayers  as the 
regular  performance  of which  has been handed  down from the Messenger  of 
Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" such as the constant  rak'ahs  to be 
offered  after the obligatory  prayers,  the Duha prayer,  the Witr prayer (to be 
offered  after Isha^,  the Tahajjud  prayer  (to be offered  during  the third portion  of 
the night),  etc, for the tradition  means  the path  which  should  be followed.
By the desirable  prayers  we mean such of prayers  as whose  great excellence  
has been transmitted,  even though  the regular  performance  of which  has not 
been narrated,  like, as we shall relate,  the prayers  which  are offered  on certain  
days and nights  of the week,  the prayer  on coming  out of and entering  the house,  
and the like of that. By the voluntary  prayers  we mean  what  is beyond  all of that,  
in connection  with which  there  is no narration,  but the servant  does voluntarily,  
to fulfill  his desire  to have private  talk with Allah  Almighty  through  the prayers  
the great  excellence  of which  has been pointed  out by law in general.  In this way 
he seems  to be a free donator,  since  he is not urged  to offer  those  certain  prayers,  
even though  he is required  to offer  prayer  in general.  To do anything  voluntarily  
is to donate  it.
Those  three categories  are given the name  of supererogatory  in so far as the 
supererogatory  is beyond  what  is obligatory.  Our purpose  is to use such terms  as 
traditional,  desirable,  voluntary  and supererogatory  in their technical  sense,  in 
order  to define  those  concepts;  and there  is no blame  upon  anyone  to change  the 
terms,  since there is no strictness  about  the usage of terms after understanding  
their  meanings.  Each  of those  categories  has degrees  of superiority  in accordance  
with the narrations  which  pertain  to their merits,  and the duration  of the regular  
performance  of them  on the part of the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace be upon him", as well as the strength  of authenticity,  reliability  and 
celebrity  of the related  narrations  and traditions.  For this reason,  it is said, for 
instance,  that the traditions  of the congregational  prayer  are more  excellent  than  
those of the individual  prayer.  However,  the most excellent  from amongst  the 
congregational  traditions  is the Id prayer,  followed  by the eclipse  prayer,  and then  
the prayer  of Istisqa'  (invoking  for rain).  But the most  excellent  from  amongst  the 
individual  traditions  are the Witr prayer,  followed  by both rak'ahs  (to be offered  
before)  Fajr prayer,  and then the other fixed prayers  to be offered  after the 
obligatory  ones,  in accordance  with their  variations.
Furthermore,  it should  be known  that the Supererogatory  prayers,  in relation


Page 371:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
to their  appurtenances  (i.e. their  connection  with the circumstances  and occasions  
on which  they happen),  are divided  into: those  connected  with causes,  such as the 
Eclipse  of the Sun, and the invocation  for Rain; those connected  with seasons,  
and those connected  with seasons  are divided  into: what is repeated  with the 
recurrence  of day and night,  what  is repeated  with the recurrence  of the week,  or 
what is repeated  with the' recurrence  of the year. All are divided  into four  
categories:369
The First Category:  That Which  Is Repeated  
With The Recurrence  Of Days And Nights
It is of eight items,  five of which  are to be performed  regularly  following  the 
five obligatory  prayers,  in addition  to three after them,  i.e. the Duha  prayer,  the 
prayer  between  both Maghrib  and Isha' (obligatory  prayers),  and the Tahajjud  
prayer.
The first is the regular  two-rak'ah  prayer  prior to Fajr (Dawn).  (It is narrated  
by Muslim  on the authority  of A'ishah  that) the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "The two rak'ahs  (to be offered  just 
before)  Fajr are better  than all of the world  and what it contains."  Its due time  
starts with the rise of the real dawn, i.e. when the streaks  of its light seem  
horizontal  not vertical.  But it is difficult  to recognize  that only with the eye, 
particularly  during  its early birth,  unless  one learns  the mansions  of the moon  or 
is well-acquainted  with the conduction  of its appearance  with the stars visible  to 
the sight,  and so deduces  it from the stars. He may know  it from the moon  on 
two nights  of the month,  for the moon  rises at the time of dawn  on the twenty-  
sixth night,  and the morning  appears  at the setting  of the moon  on the twelfth  
night  of the month.  This is regular,  with slight  indiscretion  in some of the signs  
of the zodiac,  the explanation  of which  is lengthy.  The learning  of the mansions  
of the moon  is one of the important  tasks due upon the devotee,  in order to 
watch  by it the measurements  of times  at night  and in the morning.
On the other  hand,  the due time of performing  the two-rak'ah  prayer  before  
Fajr finishes  by the end of the due time of the obligatory  prayer  of Fajr itself,  i.e. 
with the rise of the sun, even though  it is out of the right  way of sunnah  to offer  
them  before  Fajr (at any time one performs  it), but if he enters  the mosque  and 
the obligatory  prayer has been established,  let him engage  in the obligatory  
prayer,  depending  upon the narration  (of Muslim  on the authority  of Abu  
Hurairah)  in which  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" said: "When  the prayer  is established,  there should  be no prayer  to be 
offered  but the written  obligatory  prayer."  Once  he finishes  from the obligatory  
prayer,  let him stand  and offer  the two-rak'ah  prayer  of Fajr.
It is right to say that their fulfillment  is due as long as they occur before  
sunrise,  in view of the fact that they follow  the obligatory  prayer  just in its due 
time; and it is out of the right way of tradition  to observe  the sequence  between  
them, in relation  to bringing  them forward,  and following  them with the 
obligatory  prayer  provided  that he should  not meet a congregation,  for in this


Page 372:
370 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
case, the sequence  should  be reversed,  and they should  be performed  out of the 
fulfillment  of prayer  in the prescribed  time. Nevertheless,  it is more desirable  to 
offer both rak'ahs  in the house,  and make them short, and then go to the 
mosque,  and offer there the two-rak'ah  prayer  of greeting  the mosque,  after  
which  he should  sit down and offer no prayer  before  he offers the obligatory  
written  prayer.  It is desirable  to spend  the period  between  the Fajr prayer  and the 
rise of the son in the celebration  (of Allah's  Praises)  and contemplation  (of His 
Favours  and Graces),  and be satisfied  with the obligatory  prayer  of Fajr.
The second  is the constant  prayer  (to be offered  before  and after) Zhuhr  
(Noon)  prayer;  and they are of six rak'ahs,  two of which after the obligatory  
prayer,  and they are fixed tradition,  and the remaining  four before  it, and they  
belong  to the tradition,  even though  less fixed than the former.  In this respect,  it 
is narrated  (by Abd Al-Malik  Ibn Habib  on the authority  of Abu Mas'ud,  even  
though  Al-Ghazali  narrates  it) on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that the 
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "He, who offers  four rak'ahs  just 
after the sun passes the meridian,  in which he makes perfect  their related  
recitation,  bowings  and prostrations,  seventy  thousand  angels  pray with him, and 
keep asking  for Allah's  Forgiveness  for him until the night."
It is narrated  (by Ahmad,  Abu Dawud  and Ibn Majah)  on the authority  of 
Abu Ayyub  Al-Ansari  that the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" never  
failed to offer four rak'ahs  just after the decline  of the sun, which  he used to 
prolong,  and he said: "At that time, the gates of the heaven  are open,  during  
which  I like to have a good deed raised  for me." This narration  is confirmed  
by that of Umm Habibah  (by An-Nasa'i  and Al-Hakim),  the wife of the 
Prophet  "Peace  be upon him", in which she said: the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: “He, who offers  twelve  rak'ahs  
regularly  on a day and a night (as supererogatory)  other than the obligatory  
written  prayers,  a house  will be built for him in the Garden:  two before  the 
Fajr (obligatory  prayer);  four before  the Zhuhr  (obligatory  prayer),  and two 
after it; two before Asr (obligatory  prayer);  and two after the Maghrib  
(obligatory  prayer). ”
(It is further  unanimously  narrated)  on the authority  of Ibn Umar  “Allah be 
pleased  with both ”: I remembered  from The Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s 
blessing  and peace be upon him” ten rak’ahs to be offered  as supererogatory  
prayer  regularly  everyday..."  and he mentioned  the same as Umm Habibah  
mentioned  with the exception  of the two-rak'ah  prayer  before  Fajr, concerning  
which  he said: "None  was admitted  to the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  
him" at that time, but my sister Hafsah  told me that he used to offer a two-  
rak'ah  prayer  in his house,  and then come  out (to the mosque)."  He mentioned  
in his narration  that (the Prophet  used to offer)  two rak'ahs  before  Zhuhr,  and 
two after the Isha';  and in this way, the two rak'ahs  have become  more  assured  
than the four.
The due time of those begins  with the decline  of the sun, and the decline  is 
known  by the increase  of the shade  of the persons  standing  erect,  inclining  to the


Page 373:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
direction  of the East,  since  the shade  of a man falls to the direction  of the west  as 
long at the emergence  of the sun; and as much  as the sun continues  to rise, the 
shade  gradually  becomes  less, and swerves  from the direction  of the west until  
the sun reaches  the utmost  degree  of its elevation,  which is the measure  of 
midday,  and that is the utmost  degree  of the shortness  of the shade.  Then,  when  
the sun passes  from the utmost  degree  of elevadon,  the shade  begins  to lengthen;  
and when  such increase  of length  becomes  appreciable  to the sense,  the due dme  
of noon  begins.
It is known,  of a surety,  that the sun decline  according  to the knowledge  of 
Allah occurs  before  it, but no obligadons  are due in connecuon  with anything  
that is beyond  the observation  of the sense.  The amount  of the shade  remaining,  
which  is cast from a man and goes on increasing,  becomes  long in winter  and 
short in summer.  The utmost  degree  of its length  is when the sun reaches  the 
first of Capricorn,  and the utmost  degree  of its shortness  is when  it reaches  the 
first of Cancer.  This is known  by means  of feet and measurements.
From  among  the methods  which  are at hand for verification,  the one who is 
excellent  in observation  of the stars might  take on, a mention  might  be made  of 
that according  to which  he should  note the axis of the north at night,  and place  
upon the earth a square  board  in a symmetrical  position,  making  one of its sides  
towards  the polar-axis  in a position,  so that if you were to suppose  a stone  to fall 
from  the axis to the earth,  and then suppose  a line to be extended  from the place  
where  the stone  falls to the side of the board  which  is near it, then the line woulc  
form upon the board two right angles,  i.e. the line would  not be inclining  to 
either  one of the two sides. Then set up a post upon the board,  vertically  and 
symmetrically,  in the place of the mark,  which  is opposite  to the polar-axis.  Its 
shade falls upon the board  at the first portion  of the day, inclining  towards  the 
direction  of the west on the side of line (a). In the east side it continues  to incline  
until it superimposes  itself on line (b), so that, as it moves,  should  its end be 
extended,  it would  reach  in a straight  line to the place of the falling  of the stone,  
parallel  to the east and the west sides of the board,  without  inclining  to anyone  of 
them. When  its inclination  to the west side ceases,  the sun reaches  the utmost  
degree  of its elevation,  and then, when  the shade  swerves  from the line which  is 
upon the board to the east side, the sun has passed the meridian.  This is 
perceived  by the sense, with verification  of the time which is close to the 
beginning  of the passing  of the meridian  as it is in the knowledge  of Allah.  Then  
you make  a mark  at the end of the shade  when  it swerves,  and so, when  the shade  
from the mark becomes  like the post itself in length, the time of A.sr y i.e. 
afternoon,  begins.  There  is no harm in having  this amount  of knowledge  of the 
passing  of the meridian,  As drawn  above.
The third is the constant  four-rak'ah  prayer to be offered  before Asr 
(Afternoon).  In this issue it is narrated  (by Abu Dawud  and An-Nasa'i  on the 
authority  of Ibn Umar,  even  though  Al-Ghazali  relates  it) on the authority  of Abu  
Hurairah  that the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "Allah's  mercy  
be upon  a servant  who offers  a four-rak'ah  prayer  before  Asr (obligatory  prayer)."371


Page 374:
372 The quarter  of the acts of worship
To do so in the hope of being  included  in the invocation  of the Messenger  of 
Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" is constantly  desirable  seeing  that 
his invocation  should  inevitably  receive  answer  (from  Allah  Almighty).  But even,  
he was not so much  regular  in performing  those  four-rak'ah  prayer  before  Asr as 
he was in performing  the constant  two-rak'ah  prayer  before  Zhuhr.
The fourth  is the constant  two-rak'ah  prayer  to be offered  after Maghrib  
(Sunset)  obligatory  prayer,  and there  is no difference  in the narrations  pertaining  
to them,  but as to the two-rak'ah  prayer  before  it, it has been handed  down  from  
such holy companions  as Ubai  Ibn Ka'b,  Ubadah  Ibn As-Samit,  Abu Dharr,  Zaid  
Ibn Thabit,  and others, (according  to an unanimous  narration)  Ubadah  or 
somebody  else said: "Whenever  the Adhan  of Maghrib  prayer  was pronounced,  
the holy companions  of the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" would  
hasten  to the pillars  (of the mosque)  and offer  a two-rak'ah  prayer."  (According  
to the narration  of Muslim  on the authority  of Anas  in which)  he said: "We used  
to offer a two-rak'ah  prayer  before  the Maghrib  (obligatory  prayer)  that one 
entering  the mosque  would  think we've  prayed  Maghrib  and thus he would  ask: 
"Have  you prayed  Maghrib?"
however,  this is implicit  from the general  application  of the statement  of the 
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" (according  to what  
is unanimously  narrated  on the authority  of Abdullah  Ibn Mughaffal):  "Between  
each  Adhan  and Iqamah,  there  is a supererogatory  prayer  to be performed  by him 
who likes to do it (voluntarily)."  Ahmad  Ibn Hanbal  used to pray them,  and when  
the people  criticized  him he left offering  them,  when  he was asked  about  that he 
said: "I do not see the people  praying  them,  thereupon  I've left offering  them."  
he further  said: "It is good  that a man should  pray them  in his house  and whereas  
he is not seen by the people."
The due time of Maghrib  begins  with the disappearance  of sun from sights  in 
a plain land which  is not surrounded  by mountains.  But in case it is surrounded  
by mountains  from the direction  of the West, let him wait until he sees the 
appearance  of darkness  from  the direction  of the East, (depending  upon  what  is 
unanimously  narrated  on the authority  of Umar  in which)  the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "When  the (darkness  of the) night  
appears  from here (i.e. the East) and the (light  of the) day disappears  from here  
(i.e. the West),  this is the due time at which  the fasting  person  should  break  his 
fast."  It is more  desirable  to hasten  to offer  Maghrib  prayer;  and if it is delayed  to 
be offered  before  the disappearance  of the red dusk,  it will be performed  out of 
the fulfillment  of an obligatory  prayer in its prescribed  time, in spite of 
undesirability.  One night Umar delayed  offering  Maghrib  prayer  until a star 
appeared,  thereupon  he emancipated  a slave (by way of expiation).  When  Ibn 
Umar  delayed  offering  it until two stars appeared,  he emancipated  two slaves  (by 
way of expiation).
The fifth is the constant  four-rak'ah  prayer to be offered  after the Isha'  
(Evening)  obligatory  prayer.  (It is narrated  by Abu Dawud)  that) A'ishah  said:  
"The  Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" used to offer  a four-rak'ah  prayer;
!


Page 375:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  ------------
after  the last obligatory  prayer  of Isha,  and then  go to bed."
One of the learned  men, depending  upon the various  narrations  in this 
respect,  chose  to make  the number  of the constant  rak'ahs  seventeen,  like that of 
the obligatory  prayers:  two before  the Morning  prayer,  four before  and two after  
Zhuhr,  four before  Asr, two after Maghrib,  and three after the last obligatory  
prayer of Isha, i.e. the Witr prayer.  But if you know the various  narrations  
pertaining  to the supererogatory  prayers,  there  will be no significance  of fixing  a 
certain  number  for them.  (According  to the narration  of Ahmad,  Ibn Hibban  and 
Al-Hakim  on the authority  of Abu Dharr)  the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be 
upon  him" said: "The prayer  is the best of (deeds  and the one offers  it is in the 
best of) positions:  let one do much  of it if he so likes, or little if he so likes."  In 
this way, the choice  of every  devotee  agrees  with his desire  for doing  good.  Some  
of those supererogatory  prayers,  as we have mentioned,  seem to be more fixed  
than others,  and it is more  implausible  to leave  what  is more  fixed,  seeing  that the 
obligatory  prayers  will be completed  with the supererogatory  prayers  (on the Day  
of Judgement).  So, he, who does not offer much  of them is about  to have even  
no obligatory  prayer  safe from  being  in need of completion.
The sixth  is the Witr prayer.  (It is narrated  by At-Tirmidhi  and Ibn Majah  on 
the authority  of Ibn Abbas,  and Ibn Adi that) Anas Ibn Malik said: The 
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" used to offer three rak'ahs  for Witr  
after Isha' prayer,  and recite in the first rak'ah (the Surah which  begins  with'  
"Exalt  the Name  of your Lord, Most High",  in the second  "O you who rejec  
faith" and in the third "Say: 'He is Allah,  the One and Only'".  According  to the 
narration  (of Muslim  on the authority  of A'ishah)  the Messenger  of Allah  used to 
offer  after  Witr prayer  two rak'ahs  while  sitting,  or according  to another  version,  
sitting  cross-legged.  According  to the narration  (of Al-Baihaqi  on the authority  of 
Abu Umamah)  whenever  the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  him" intended  
to go to bed, he would  drag himself  to it, and offer on it a two-rak'ah  prayer  
before  he would  lie, in which  he would  recite  both Surahs  of Az-Zalzalah  and At- 
Takathur,  or Al-Kafirun  according  to another  version.
On the other hand,  it is permissible  to have Witr prayer  connected  with, or 
separated  with a single  or a pair of salutations.  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him" offered  a single  rak'ah  for Witr (according  to a 
certain  narration)  and three, five, up to eleven  with odd number  of rak'ahs  
(according  to the different  narrations  in that respect);  and there  is a questionable  
narration  concerning  the performance  of thirteen  (rak'ahs  for Witr). But, the 
narration  which raises the number  to seventeen  is very strange.  Those  rak'ahs  
which we've given the name of Witr belong to Muhammad's  night  
(supererogatory)  prayer, which are called Tahajjud;  and of a surety, the 
performance  of Tahajjud  prayer  at night  is constant,  and its great excellence  will 
be discussed  later in the Book  of Regular  Divisions.
There  is difference  about the most excellent  of Witr prayer.  It is said that 
offering  a separate  rak'ah  for Witr  is more  excellent,  since  the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" used to offer  a separate  rak'ah  for Witr373


Page 376:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
regularly.  But it is also said that the Witr connected  prayer  is more  excellent,  since  
it removes  the suspicion  of contradiction  (of opinions),  particularly  from the part 
of the imam,  who might  be followed  by him who is not of the opinion  that the 
separate  rak'ah  is regarded  as prayer.  If he offers  the connected  Witr prayer,  let 
him state his intention  of performing  Witr prayer  by means  of all; and if he is 
satisfied  with offering  a single rak'ah  for Witr after the two-rak'ah  prayer  to be 
offered  after Isha',  or even after the obligatory  prayer  of Isha' itself,  let him state  
the intention  to perform  Witr prayer  by it; and in this case it will be held valid.  
That is because  the stipulation  of Witr is to be offered  with an odd number  of 
rak'ahs,  in order  to make  such of prayers  as prior  to it an odd number  of rak'ahs;  
and of a surety,  the single  rak'ah  does so. But if it is to be offered  before  Isha'  
obligatory  prayer,  it will not be held valid, i.e. one doing  so will not attain the 
good reward  of Witr prayer,  which  is much better  for him than the red camels  
(the most expensive  and the dearest  to the ancient  Arabs) according  to the 
narration  (of Abu Dawud,  At-Tirmidhi  and Ibn Majah on the authority  of 
Kharijah  Ibn Hudhafah),  otherwise,  the single  rak'ah  is valid whenever  it may be 
performed.  It is not valid before  the Isha' prayer  only because  it violates  the 
unanimity  of the people  concerning  the act, and because  what it causes  to be an 
odd number  (of rak'ahs)  prayer  by means  of it does not precede  it.
But in case he wants  to offer three unconnected  rak'ahs  for Witr prayer,  his 
intention  concerning  the first two is questionable:  if he intends  by them the 
Tahajjud  prayer,  or the constant  prayer  to be offered  after Isha', they will not 
belong  to the Witr prayer,  and if he intends  by them the Witr prayer,  they  
themselves  will not act as Witr,  and the Witr is only what is after them,  but it is 
more obvious  that he should  state his intention  to offer Witr by them, in the 
same way as he does by the Witr of three-rak'ah  prayer  connected  (with the 
obligatory  or supererogatory  prayer).  However,  the Witr has two different  
concepts:  one is that it act as Witr in itself, and the other  is that it aims to be 
given  the quality  of Witr by what  comes  after it; and in this case the total of three  
rak'ahs  will act as Witr.
It is true then that the first two rak'ahs  are part of the three-rak'ah  prayer  of 
Witr, but to acquire  the quality  of Witr depends  upon the third one. If one then  
has the intention  to make  those  two Witr  with a third one, let him then state his 
intention  to offer  Witr by them,  seeing  that the third rak'ah  acts as Witr in itself,  
as well as it makes  Witr what  is prior to it, unlike  the two rak'ahs,  which  are not 
Witr  in themselves,  nor are they to make  Witr  what  is prior  to them,  but they are 
made Witr by what comes after them, moreover,  the Witr should be the 
conclusion  of the night  prayer,  and thus it occurs  after the Tahajjud  prayer.  The  
good  merits  of both Witr and Tahajjud,  and the arrangement  related  to them  will 
be discussed  in the Book  of the Arrangement  of Regular  Divisions.
The seventh  is the Duha  (Forenoon)  prayer.  To offer  it regularly  is one of the 
acts of resolute  power  and great excellence.  The number  of its rak'ahs  is eight  
according  to most  of the narrations.  It is narrated  (unanimously)  on the authority  
of Umm Hani', the sister of Ali Ibn Abu Talib, that the Messenger  of Allah374


Page 377:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
"Peace  be upon him" offered  eight  rak'ahs  for Duha  prayer,  which  he prolonged  
and perfected.  But none else has narrated  this number  (of rak'ahs  for Duha  
prayer).  As for A'ishah,  she mentioned  (according  to the narration  of Muslim)  
that the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" used to offer four rak'ahs  for 
Duha,  and add to them  as much  as Allah  Almighty  willed  him to do. She did not 
fix the number  of this increase.  But he was regular  on offering  four at minimum,  
and somedmes  he might  pray more.  It is narrated  (by Al-Hakim  on the authority  
of Jabir) that the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" used to pray six 
rak'ahs  for Duha.
As to its due time, it is narrated  (by Ibn Majah,  An-Nasa'i  and others)  on the 
authority  of Ali that the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" used to offer  
six rak'ahs  for Duha prayer  in two different  dmes:  when the sun rose high he 
would  offer a two-rak ’ah prayer;  and this is the first pordon  of the first regular  
division  of the day, as it will seem  later. When  the sun brightened  up and became  
in the fourth  part of the sky on the side of the East, he would  offer four rak'ahs.  
But the first is when the sun mounts  only the measure  of half a lance,  and the 
second  is when  a fourth  of the day goes, in correspondence  with the Asr prayer,  
for its due dme is when a fourth  of the day remains.  Zhuhr  prayer  is at the 
middle  of the day, and the Duha prayer  is at the middle  point between  the 
appearance  of the sun and its passing  the meridian,  just as the Asr is at the middle  
point  between  the passing  of the meridian  and the setdng  of the sun. This is the 
most excellent  of the dmes.  The due dme of Duha  prayer  lies within  the period  
from  the ascent  of the sun until  what  comes  before  its passing  of the meridian.
The eighth  is the constant  performance  of rak'ahs  between  both Maghrib  and 
Isha' prayers;  and it is fixed. The number  of its rak'ahs  has been handed  down  
(according  to the narration  of At-Tabarani  on the authority  of Ammar  Ibn Yasir,  
and At-Tirmidhi  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah)  from the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" in which he said: "Between  both  
Maghrib  and Isha' prayers,  six rak'ahs  should  be performed  (constandy)."  This  
prayer  has a great  excellence,  and it is said that it is intended  by the statement  of 
Allah Almighty:  " Their  limbs do forsake  their beds of sleep,  the while  they call 
on their  Lord,  in Fear and Hope."  (As-Sajdah:16)
llll d <j&
(It is narrated  by Ibn Al-Mubarak  on the authority  of Ibn Al-Mundhir  that)  
the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "He, who  
offers  prayer  between  both Maghrib  and Isha' (obligatory  prayers),  (let him be 
sure that) it belongs  to the prayer  of those  who turn to Him again and again (in 
true penitence)."  (It is further  narrated  by Abu Al-Walid  As-Saffar  on the 
authority  of Abdullah  Ibn Umar that) the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon him" said: "He, who keeps  himself  in a gathering  mosque  in 
the period  between  both Maghrib  and Isha' prayers,  in which  he speaks  not but 
with prayer  or Qur'an,  it is incumbent  upon  Allah  Almighty  to build for him two 
palaces  in the Garden,  the width  of each of which  is as much  as (a distance  to be375


Page 378:
376 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
covered  in) one hundred  journey,  and between  which  a garden  will be planted  for 
him, and if all of the inhabitants  of the earth go round  it, it will extend  to imply  
them."  however,  its remaining  good merits  will be discussed  later in the Book  of 
Regular  Divisions,  Allah  Willing.
The Second  Category:  That Which  Is Repeated  
With  The Recurrence  Of Weeks
It implies  the prayers  to be offered  on each of the days and nights  along  the 
week.  As for days,  let's start  with Sunday.
Sunday:  It is narrated  (by Abu Musa Al-Madini)  on the authority  of Abu  
Hurairah  that the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "He,  who offers  
a four-rak'ah  prayer  on Sunday,  in each rak'ah  of which  he recites  Al-Fadhah,  in 
addition  to (the Holy Verse which says): "The Messenger  and the faithful  
believers  have believed  in what has been revealed  to him from his Lord..."  (Al- 
Baqarah  285)
4 (JJS cr? ^j tJj** ^ J^
Allah Almighty  writes  for him as many  good deeds  as the number  of every  
male and female  Christian,  give him a reward  (equal  to that) of a Prophet,  writes  
to him (the reward  of) both Hajj and Umrah,  and write for him for each rak'ah  
(the reward  of) one thousand  prayers,  and give him, for each letter  (he recites  in 
this prayer)  a city full of pleasant-smelling  musk."
It is further  narrated  (by Abu Musa  Al-Madini)  on the authority  of AJi Ibn 
Abu Talib that the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him"  
said: "Observe  the Allah's  Oneness  through  offering  so much  prayers  on Sunday,  
for He Almighty  is One,  Who has no partner.  He, who offers  four rak'ahs  after  
Zhuhr  obligatory  and constant  prayer,  in the first of which  he recites  Al-Fatihah  
and the Surah  of As-Sajdah,  in the second  Al-Fatihah  and the Surah  of Al-Mulk,  
after which  he recites  testification  and concludes  (the first two rak’ahs) with the 
End Salutation,  and then stands and offers two further  rak'ahs,  in which he 
recites  Al-Fatihah  and the Surah  of Al-Jumu'ah,  and then asks Allah  Almighty  (to 
fulfill for him) his need,  it is incumbent  upon  Allah  Almighty  to fulfill  for him his 
need."
Monday:  It is narrated  (by Abu Musa  Al-Madini)  on the authority  of  Jabir  that 
the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "He, who  
offers  a two-rak'ah  prayer  at the advance  of the day on Monday,  in each rak'ah  of 
which  he recites  Al-Fatihah  and the Holy Verse  of the Throne  (i.e. Al-Baqarah  
255)
XS$  aJ- 4 ^ 4 li )y /• 'S fI > ■Jj SJj V JST > 
fti Ll; *blj IxJp o Yljw. ^ (^4ill:
Once,  in addition  to "Say: ’He is Allah,  the One and Only"  and both  Surahs  of


Page 379:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer
seeking  refuge  (with Allah from Satan)  once each, and when  he concludes  with  
the End Salutation,  he asks for Allah's  Forgiveness  ten times,  and invoke  Allah's  
Prayer  and Blessing  upon the Prophet  "Peace  be upon  him" ten times,  all of his 
sins will be forgiven  for him by Allah  Almighty."
It is narrated  (by Abu Musa  Al-Madini)  on the authority  of Anas Ibn Malik  
that the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "He,  
who prays twelve  rak'ahs  on Monday,  in each rak'ah of which he recites  Al- 
Fatihah  and the Holy  Verse  of the Throne  (i.e. Al-Baqarah  255)377
15 ^ Ca) i£j'yC*JJ\ C» /*) fy jO-Lb-li  “j 'yA ^|l 4jjl 5/ ^
cli< L1_j <_4yip t 0y^pyi  Vj f-^l>- Cy JLgJ-Ul yo C ‘ij
4 (S') yAy Ufrblf-  ^'yC*jS\* 1 7 '
Once,  and when  he finishes  he recites  "Say: 'He is Allah,  the One and only'"  
twelve times, and asks for Allah's  Forgiveness  twelve times, on the Day of 
Judgement,  he will be called:  "Where  is so and so, son of so and so? Let's stand  
to take his reward  from  Allah  Almighty."  The first to be given  of that reward  will 
be one thousand  suites,  and he will be crowned  and admitted  to the Garden,  
whereupon  he will be received  kindly  by one hundred  thousand  angels,  each of 
whom  will have a gift, and they will escort  him until he goes round  one thousand  
palaces  of light,  shining  with brightness."
Tuesday:  It is narrated  (by Abu Musa  Al-Madini)  on the authority  of Anas  
Ibn Malik  that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him"  
said: "He, who prays ten rak'ahs  on Tuesday,  at midday,  or at the advance  of the 
day (according  to another  version),  in each rak'ah  of which  he recites  Al-Fatihah  
and the Holy Verse  of the Throne  (i.e. Al-Baqarah  255) once, and "Say: 'He is 
Allah,  the One and Only"'  thrice,  no sin will be write  (and accounted)  against  him 
for seventy  days (to come),  and in case he dies within  those  seventy  days, he will 
have  died as a martyr,  and the sins of seventy  years  will be forgiven  for him."
Wednesday:  It is narrated  (by Abu Musa  Al-Madini)  on the authority  of Abu  
Musa  Al-Khawlani  from Mu'adh  Ibn Jabal that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "He, who prays twelve rak'ahs on 
Wednesday,  at the advance  of the day, in each rak'ah of which he recites  Al- 
Fatihah  and the Holy  Verse  of the Throne  (i.e. Al-Baqarah  255) once, and "Say:  
'He is Allah,  the One and Only"'  and both Surahs  of seeking  refuge  (with Allah  
from Satan) thrice,  a caller near the Throne  (of Majesty)  will call: "O slave of 
Allah!  Resume  your  work,  for Allah  has forgiven  for you all of your  previous  sins,  
removed  from you the grave's  torture,  darkness  and constriction,  and removed  
form you the distresses  of Resurrection",  and on that very day, a deed (equal  to 
that) of a Prophet  will be raised  for him."
Thursday:  It is narrated  (by Abu Musa Al-Madini)  on the authority  of 
Ikrimah  from Ibn Abbas  that the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon him" said: "He, who prays in the period  between  both Zhuhr  and Asr 
prayers  two rak'ahs,  in the first rak'ah  of which  he recites  Al-Fatihah  and the


Page 380:
378 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
Holy  Verse  of the Throne  one hundred  times,  and in the second  both Al-Fatihah  
and "Say: 'He is Allah, the One and Only'"  one hundred  times, and invokes  
Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon  Muhammad  (the Prophet)  one hundred  times,  
Allah Almighty  will give him the reward  of him who has observed  the fasts of 
(the three months  of) Rajab,  Sha'ban  and Ramadan,  and he will receive  as much  
reward  as that of him who has performed  Hajj to the House,  and as much  good  
deeds  as the number  of those  who  believe  in Allah,  and put their  trust  in Him  will 
be written  for him."
Friday:  It is narrated  (and this narration  is unidentified,  and this Hadith  also is 
not reliable)  on the authority  of Ali Ibn Abu Talib that the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "Verily,  the whole  of Friday  is 
fitting  for prayer.  No believing  servant  stands,  when the sun rises and becomes  
high as much  as a lance  or more,  and performs  ablution  perfectly,  and offers  the 
two-rak'ah  prayer  of Duha,  out of sincere  faith in, and expecting  the reward  of 
that from Allah Almighty,  but that Allah Almighty  writes two hundred  good  
deeds  for him, and plots out of his account  two hundred  evil deeds;  and he, who  
prays four rak'ahs,  Allah  Almighty  raises him four hundred  degrees  high in the 
Garden;  and he, who prays  eight  rak'ahs,  Allah  Almighty  raises  him eight  hundred  
degrees  high in the Garden  and forgives  for him all of his sins; and he who prays  
twelve  rak'ahs,  Allah Almighty  writes for him two thousand  and two hundred  
good deeds,  and plots out of his account  two thousand  and two hundred  evil 
deeds,  and further  raises  him two thousand  and two hundred  degrees  high in the 
Garden."
It is narrated  (by Ad-Daraqatni  and Al-Khatib  on the authority  of Malik)  that 
Ibn Umar  said: The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "He, who  
enters  the mosque  on Friday,  and offers  a four-rak'ah  prayer  before  the Friday  
obligatory  prayer,  in each rak'ah  of which  he recites  (Al-Fatihah  in which  Allah  
says) "Praise  be to Allah",  and "Say: 'He is Allah,  the One and Only"'  fifty times,  
will not die until he sees his sitting  place  in the Garden,  or it is seen for him (by 
others)."
Saturday:  It is narrated  (by Abu Musa  Al-Madini)  on the authority  of Abu  
Hurairah  that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him"  
said: "He, who offers,  on Saturday,  a four-rak'ah  prayer,  in each rak'ah  of which  
he recites  Al-Fatihah  once and "Say: 'He is Allah,  the One and Only"'  thrice,  and 
when  he finishes  he recites  the Holy  Verse  of the Throne  (Al-Baqarah  255),  Allah  
Almighty  records  for him by each letter (he utters)  the reward  of both Hajj and 
Umrah,  and grants  him the reward  of fasting  during  the day and standing  for 
supererogatory  prayers  at night  for a whole  year,  and Allah  Almighty  further  gives  
him, by each letter he utters,  the reward  of a martyr,  and he will be under  the 
shade of Allah's  Throne  (of Majesty),  in the company  of the Prophets  and 
martyrs."
As for the nights  along  the week,  they  go as follow:
The night of Sunday:  It is narrated  (by Abu Musa Al-Madini)  on the 
authority  of Anas Ibn Malik  that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and


Page 381:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
peace  be upon  him" said: "He,  who prays,  on the night  of Sunday,  twenty  rak'ahs,  
in each rak'ah  of which  he recites  Al-Fatihah  and "Say: 'He is Allah,  the One and 
Only'"  fifty times,  both Surahs  of seeking  refuge  (with Allah from Satan)  once  
each,  asks for the Forgiveness  of Allah  Almighty  one hundred  times,  and invokes  
forgiveness  for himself  as well as his parents  one hundred  times,  invokes  Allah's  
Prayer  and Blessing  one hundred  times,  and holds  himself  free from having  any 
claim of might  and power,  and seeks the shelter  of Allah,  and then says: 'I bear  
testimony  to the fact that there is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah,  and I 
bear testimony  to the fact that Adam is Allah's sincere friend and Primal  
formation,  and Ibrahim  is Allah's Bosom friend, and Moses is Allah's  
interlocutor,  and Jesus is Allah's  Spirit, and Muhammad  is Allah's  beloved',,  
receives  as much  reward  as the number  of those  who ascribe  as well as those  who  
ascribe  not a son to Allah,  and Allah raises  him in the company  of the faithful  
saved  on the Day of Judgement,  and it is incumbent  upon  Allah  to admit  him to 
the Garden  with the Prophets."
The night of Monday:  It is narrated  (by Abu Musa Al-Madini)  on the 
authority  of Al-A'mash  from Anas that the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  
him" said: "He,  who prays  on the night  of Monday  four rak'ahs,  in the first rak'ah  
of which  he recites  (Al-Fatihah  in which  Allah  says) "Praise  be to Allah"  and say: 
"Say: 'He is Allah,  the One and Only'"  ten times,  and in the second  he recites  (Al- 
Fatihah  in which  Allah  says) "Praise  be to Allah"  and say: "Say: 'He is Allah,  the 
One and Only'"  twenty  times,  and in the third he recites  (Al-Fatihah  in which  
Allah says) "Praise  be to Allah"  and say: "Say: 'He is Allah,  the One and Only'"  
thirty  times,  and in the fourth  he recites  (Al-Fatihah  in which  Allah  says) "Praise  
be to Allah"  and say: "Say: 'He is Allah,  the One and Only"'  forty times,  and 
when  he finishes  with salutation  he recites  "Say: 'He is Allah,  the One and Only'"  
seventy-five  times,  asks for Allah's  Forgiveness  for himself  as well as his parents  
seventy-five  times,  and asks Allah Almighty  for his need, it is incumbent  upon  
Allah  to give him what  he asks for." This is called  the Need  Prayer.
The night  of Tuesday:  A great reward  and enormous  return  will be assured  
to him, who offers  (on the night  of Tuesday)  two rak'ahs,  in which  he recites  in 
each one Al-Fatihah,  "Say: 'He is Allah,  the One and Only"'  and both Surahs  of 
seeking  refuge  (with  Allah  from  Satan)  fifteen  times,  and recites,  after concluding  
with salutation,  the Holy  Verse  of the Throne  fifteen  times,  and asks for Allah's  
Forgiveness  fifteen times. It is narrated  on the authority  of Umar that the 
Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  him" said: "He, who prays on the night of 
Tuesday  two rak'ahs,  and recites  in each rak'ah  Al-Fatihah,  "Verily,  We have sent  
it (the Qur'an)  down  on the Night  of Power"  and "Say: 'He is Allah,  the One and 
Only'"  seven  times,  Allah  Almighty  will save his body from the fire, and on the 
Day of  Judgement  this (prayer)  will be his leader  and guide  to the Garden."
The night  of Wednesday:  It is narrated  on the authority  of Fatimah  "Allah  
be pleased  with her" from the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon him" said: "He, who prays on the night of Wednesday  two rak'ahs,  and 
recites in the first Al-Fatihah  and "Say: I seek refuge with (Allah) Lord of379


Page 382:
380 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
daybreak..."  ten times,  and in the second  Al-Fatihah  and "Say: I seek refuge  with  
(Allah)  Lord of mankind..."  ten times,  and when he utters salutation  asks for 
Allah's  forgiveness  ten times, and invokes  Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon  
Muhammad  (the Messenger  of Allah)  ten times,  seventy  thousand  angels  from  
each firmament  of heaven  descend  to record his reward  up to the Day of 
Judgement."  According  to another  narration  "If one prays sixteen  rak'ahs,  in 
which  he recites  after Al-Fatihah  what Allah Almighty  wills him to recite,  and 
recites  in the last two rak'ahs  the Holy Verse  of the Throne  thirty  times,  and in 
the first two "Say: 'He is Allah,  the One and Only'"  thirty  times,  his intercession  
will be accepted  for ten of his household,  to whom  the fire (of Hell) has been  
assured."
It is narrated  (by Abu Musa  Al-Madini)  on the authority  of Fatimah  "Allah  be 
pleased  with her" that she said: The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" said: "He, who prays  on the night  of Wednesday  six rak'ahs,  
in which  he recites  after Al-Fatihah:  "Say: "O Allah!  Lord of Power  (and Rule),  
You  give Power  to whom  You please,  and You stripe  off Power  from  whom  You  
please:  You endue  with honour  whom  You please,  and You bring low whom  
You please:  in Your  hand  is all Good.  Verily,  over all things  You have  power"  (A1 
Imran  26)
jJjuj. fils j: fils  £ fils jL JoLUT ^>03 fils  ^ dUiii  JiL. ji >
And when he finishes  from his prayer he says: "Might Allah reward  
Muhammad  (the Messenger  of Allah) on behalf  of us as much  as is fitting  for 
him",  the sins of seventy  years  will be forgiven  for him, and a clearance  from the 
fire (of Hell) be written  for him."
The night  of Thursday:  It is narrated  (by Abu Musa  Al-Madini,  and Abu  
Mansur  Ad-Dailami)  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that he said: The  
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "If one prays,  
in the period  between  both Maghrib  and Isha' prayers,  on Thursday,  two rak'ahs,  
in each rak'ah  of which  he recites  Al-Fatihah,  the Holy  Verse  of the Throne  (Al-
Baqarah  255)
is 6 o* Vf j j u /J &  Is cf j5J t *jJ\  > *3j iJi y Si >
fii •Jjri V3 *-*3
^ c ^•* t * * *
jOJcS-
Five times,  "Say: ’He is Allah,  the One and Only" ’ five times,  both Surahs  of 
seeking  refuge  (with  Allah  from Satan)  five times,  and when  he finishes  from his 
prayer  he asks for Allah's  Forgiveness  fifteen  times,  and makes  the reward  of that 
to his parents,  he will have fulfilled  the right of his parents  upon him, even  
though  if he is undutiful  and disobedient  to them,  and Allah Almighty  will give  
him the same  as He gives  the truly  faithful  believers  and martyrs."


Page 383:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer
The night  of Friday:  It is narrated  (even  though  this narration  is unreliable)  
that  Jabir  said: The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him"  
said: "He, who prays  on the night  of Friday,  in the period  between  both Maghrib  
and Isha' prayers,  twelve  rak'ahs,  in each rak'ah  of which  he recites  Al-Fadhah  
once and "Say: 'He is Allah,  the One and Only'"  eleven  times,  he seems  as if he 
ahs worshipped  Allah twelve  years,  including  observing  fasts during  their days,  
and the standing  for supererogatory  prayers  on their nights."  According  to Anas  
(but the narration  is also not authentic):  The Prophet  "Peace  be upon him" said:  
"He,  who prays,  on the night  of Friday,  Isha' in congregation,  and then offers  the 
constant  two-rak'ah  prayer  after it, and then prays ten rak'ahs,  in each of which  
he recites  Al-Fatihah,  "Say: 'He is Allah,  the One and Only'",  and both Surahs  of 
seeking  refuge,  once each,  and then offers  three-rak'ah  prayer  for Witr  and lies on 
his right  side,  with his face towards  the direction  of the Qiblah,  seems  as if he has 
given life (i.e. stood for supererogatory  prayer)  to the night of Power."  (It is 
narrated  by At-Tabarani  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that) the Messenger  of 
Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "Invoke  Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon  me so 
much  on the Night  of Eager  Desire  and the Day of Brightness,  i.e. on the night  
and the day of Friday."
The night  of Saturday:  (According  to an unidentified  narration)  Anas said:  
The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "He, who  
prays on Saturday,  between  both Maghrib  and Isha' prayers,  twelve  rak'ahs,  a 
palace  will be built for him in the Garden,  and he will seem as if he has given  in 
charity  to all of faithful  believing  men and women,  and rendered  himself  free 
from  the Jews  and it is incumbent  upon  Allah  to forgive  for him."
The Third  Category:  That Which  Is Repeated  
With  The Recurrence  Of Years
They  include  four prayers:  the prayer  of both Ids (festivals  of breaking  fast 
and sacrifice),  the prayer  of Tarawih  (rest-giving  during  the month  of Ramadan),  
and the prayers  of both Rajab  and Sha'ban
The first is the prayer  of both Ids; and its performance  is firmly  constant  and 
it is one of the rituals  of religion.  However,  seven  things  should  be observed  in it:
Firstly:  Takbir should  be in a series of three parts as follows:  "Allah is 
Greater;  Allah is Greater;  Allah is Greater;  Allah is Greater  with certainty;  and 
Praise  be to Allah so much;  and glorified  be Allah every  morning  and evening;  
there is no god but Allah, the One and Only, other than Whom  there is no 
partner;  we are sincere  to Him in faith even though  against  the will of the 
unbelievers."  One should  begin  with Takbir  on the night  of breaking  the fast (of 
the month  of Ramadan)  until the due time of the Id prayer;  and in Id Al-Adha  
(Sacrifice)  from the morning  of the day of Arafah  until the evening  of the 
thirteenth  day; and this is the most  perfect  statement  (in this issue).  Let one utter  
Takbir  following  every obligatory  and supererogatory  prayer,  seeing  that it is 
better  confirmed  to be after the obligatory  prayers.
Secondly:  when  it is the morning  of the Id day, let381
take bath,  get adorned one


Page 384:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
and apply perfume  to himself,  the same as we've mentioned  in the Friday  
congregation.  Wearing  upper  garment  and turban  is much  better  for men, and the 
children  should  avoid silk (in their clothes),  and the old women  should  avoid  
adornment  on their  setting  out.
Thirdly:  Let one come  out through  a certain  way, and returns  home  through  
another  way, the same as was done by the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon  him" (according  to the narration  of Muslim  on the authority  
of Abu Hurairah).  Furthermore,  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace be upon him" commanded  that the unmarried  young  virgins  and the 
mature  girls who stay often screened  should set out (to share good and 
celebration  with Muslims  according  to what is unanimously  narrated  on the 
authority  of Umm  Atiyyah).
Fourthly:  it is desirable  to set out to a plain land, such as the desert,  unless  it 
is Mecca  or Jerusalem.  If it is a rainy  day, there  is no harm  to pray  in the mosque;  
and even if it is a clear day, it is permissible  for the imam  to command  one to 
lead the weak  among  the people  in prayer  in the mosque,  and he himself  sets out 
with the strong  among  them  (to the plain  land)  while  glorifying  (Allah  Almighty).
Fifthly:  The due time of the prayer  should  be observed:  the due time of Id 
prayer  lies within  the period  from  the rise of the sun till its decline  (i.e. its passing  
the meridian);  and the due time of slaughtering  sacrifice  lies in the period  from  
the advance  of the sun as much  enough  to offer  a two-rak'ah  prayer  and deliver  
two sermons  till the last portion  of the thirteenth  day. In this respect,  it is 
desirable  to hasten  on to offer  the prayer  of the feast  of Sacrifice,  for the purpose  
of slaughtering,  as well as it is desirable  to delay the prayer  of the feast of 
Breaking  Fast,  in order  to have opportunity  to distribute  the alms of breaking  fast 
before  it. this is in accordance  with the tradition  of the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him".
Sixthly:  This pertains  to the way of prayer:  let the people  set out while  
uttering  Takbir  on the way, and once the imam  arrives  in the praying  place,  he 
should  not sit, nor offer any supererogatory  prayer,  and the people  also should  
interrupt  whatever  supererogatory  prayers  they might be offering,  and a call 
should  be pronounced  that "Come  to the congregational  prayer!"  the imam  then  
should  lead them in a two-rak'ah  prayer,  in the first of which  he should  recite  
seven  Takbirs  besides  that of assuming  the prayer  and that of bowing,  saying  (in 
himself)  between  each two of which:  Exalted  be Allah;  Praise  be to Allah;  There  
is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah;  Allah  is Greater.
After  the Takbir  of inauguration,  let him say: "I've set my face direct  to Him  
Who  has created  both the heavens  and the earth",  and delay  seeking  refuge  (with  
Allah  from Satan)  till after the eighth  Takbir.  Let him recite  in the first rak'ah  the 
Surah of Qaf after Al-Fatihah,  and Al-Qamar  in the second  rak'ah.  As for the 
number  of Takbirs  in the second  rak'ah,  they are five, besides  that of standing  
and that of bowing,  saying  between  each of which  the same as we've  mentioned  
in the first rak'ah.  After  the prayer,  let him deliver  two sermons,  with a sitting  (for 
break)  between  them,  if the Id prayer  escapes  anyone,  he should  fulfill  it in lieu.382


Page 385:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer
Seventhly:  Let one offer  a ran as sacrifice.  In this issue it is narrated  by Abu  
Dawud,  At-Tirmidhi  and others on the authority  of Anas and Jabir that the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" sacrificed  two 
white-and-black  rams,  which  he slaughtered  with his own hand and said: "In the 
Name  of Allah;  and Allah  is Greater:  this is on behalf  of me, and of such of my 
nation  as does not sacrifice."  It is narrated  by Abu Dawud  on the authority  of 
Umm  Salamah  that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" said: "He, who sees the new moon  of (the month  of) Dhul-Hijjah,  and he 
has the intention  to offer a sacrifice  (on the tenth of Dhul-Hijjah),  let him take 
nothing  from his hair or from his nails" (i.e. he should  not cut short  his hair, nor 
trim his nails).
(It is narrated  by At-Tirmidhi  and Ibn Majah  on the authority  of) Abu Ayyub  
AJ-Ansari  that he said: "During  the lifetime  of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace be upon him", a man would  offer as sacrifice  a sheep on 
behalf  of his family,  from  which  they would  eat and feed others."  one might  eat 
of his sacrifice  even till after three days and more,  according  to the concession  
which  was given  to them in this respect  to abrogate  the forbiddance.  According  
to Sufyan  Ath-Thawri:  It is desirable  that one should  pray twelve  rak'ahs  after the 
prayer  of Id Al-Fitr,  and six after the prayer  of Id Al-Adha;  and he tells that this 
is out of the tradition.
The second  is the prayer  of Tarawih  (rest-giving);  and it consists  of twenty  
rak'ahs,  and the way of performing  it is well-known.  To be sure, it is a constant  
tradition,  even though  less confirmed  than the prayer  of both Ids. But there is 
difference  as to whether  it is better to be performed  individually  or in 
congregation,  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him"  
himself  came  out and led it in congregation  for two or three nights,  after  which  
he did not come  out justifying  that with his saying:  "I fear it might  be enjoined  
upon you." But Umar "Allah be pleased  with him" prompted  the people  to 
perform  it in congregation,  seeing  that he had become  safe from its being  
enjoined  upon  the people,  after the stoppage  of the Divine  Revelation  (with the 
death  of the Prophet).
Thus,  it might  be said that to perform  it in congregation  is better,  depending  
upon the act of Umar,  as well as upon the fact that there is blessing  in the 
congregation  which has its great excellence,  as attested  by the obligatory  
prescribed  prayers  (which  should  be offered  in congregation).  Moreover,  one 
might be lazy to pray it individually.  But he might be active on seeing  the 
congregation.  It might  be also said that to perform  it individually  is better,  since  it 
belongs  to the tradition  more  than to the rituals,  such as the Id prayers;  and it is 
more fitting  to be joined  to the Duha prayer  and the prayer  of greeting  the 
mosque,  and no congregation  has been sent for it. it is the habit  that a gathering  
of people  might  enter  the mosque  together,  but they do not offer the two-rak'ah  
prayer  of greeting  the mosque  in congregation.
In this connection  it is narrated  by Ibn Abu Shaibah  on the authority  of 
Damrah  Ibn Habib  from one of the companions  that the Messenger  of Allah383


Page 386:
384 The quarter  of the acts of worship
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "The superiority  of performing  
the voluntary  prayer  in one's house  to performing  it in the mosque  is like the 
superiority  of performing  the obligatory  prescribed  prayer  in the mosque  to 
performing  it in the house."  It is further  narrated  by Ibn Abu Ash-Shaikh  on the 
authority  of Anas that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon him" said: "A single prayer  to be performed  in this mosque  of mine is 
better  than one hundred  prayers  to be performed  in any mosque  else, and a single  
prayer  to be performed  in the Sacred  Mosque  is better  than one thousand  prayers  
to be performed  in my mosque;  and the most  excellent  of all of that is two-rak'ah  
prayer  one offers  in one of the corners  of his house,  which  none  knows  but Allah  
Almighty."  That's  because  showing  off and sophistication  might befall one in 
congregation,  from  which  he might  be secure  in solitude.  This is all about  it.
But, the congregation  is favoured  as Umar "Allah be pleased  with him"  
thought  it to be: the congregation  has been set for some  supererogatory  prayers,  
and this (Tarawih  prayer)  is fitting  to be one of the rites which  would  appear.  
But to turn to the possibility  of showing  off in congregation,  and laziness  in 
solitude  is to deviate  from the real purpose  of considering  the great  excellence  
of congregation,  in so far as it is a collective  worship;  and the one who says so 
seems  as if he says: "To perform  prayer  (in congregation)  is better  than to leave  
it by laziness  (in solitude),  and sincerity  is better  than showing  off." So, let's 
suppose  it in the case of the one who is self-confident  that he will not become  
indolent  once he is in solitude,  as well as he will not show  off once he attends  
the congregation.  Which of both then is much better for him? The  
consideration  depends  upon the comparison  between  the great blessing  of 
congregation,  and the greater  power  of sincerity  and attentiveness  in solitude;  
and this might  make him hesitate  to prefer  one of them to the other. It is 
desirable  to practice  Qunut  in the Witr prayer  during  the last half  of (the month  
of) Ramadan.
As for the prayer  of Rajab,  it is narrated  (and this narration  is fabricated)  that 
the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "No one 
observes  fast on the first Thursday  of (the month  of) Rajab,  and then offers,  in 
the period  between  both Maghrib  and Isha' prayers,  twelve  rak'ahs,  making  a 
break  between  each two with a salutation,  in each rak'ah  of which  he recites  Al- 
Fatihah  once, "Verily,  We have sent it down  on the night  of Power"  thrice,  and 
"Say: 'He is Allah,  the One and Only'"  twelve  times,  and when  he finishes  from  
his prayer  he invokes  Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon  me seventy  times,  saying:  
"O Allah! Send Your Prayer  and Blessing  upon Muhammad,  the unlettered  
Prophet,  as well as upon his family",  and then falls in prostration,  and says 
seventy  times:  Exalted  be You; Hallowed  be You,  Lord  of Dominion  and Spirit",  
after  which  he raises  his head and says seventy  times:  "O Lord!  Embrace  me with  
Your Forgiveness  and mercy,  and overlook  (such of sins as) You know:  verily,  
You are Most Exalted  in Might,  Most Generous",  and then performs  another  
prostration  in which  he says the same as he has said in the first, and then asks


Page 387:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer
Allah in his prostration  for his need, but that it will be fulfilled  for him." the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" resumed:  "None  
offers  this prayer  but that Allah  AJmighty  forgives  for him all of his sins, even  
though  they are as much  as the foam  of the ocean,  as enormous  as is the number  
of sand,  as heavy  as is the weight  of mountains,  as abundant  as is the number  of 
the leaves of trees; and on the Day of Judgement,  his intercession  will be 
accepted  for seven  hundred  of his household,  to whom  the fire (of Hell) has been  
assured."  However,  this prayer  is desirable,  and we have included  it in this 
division  because  it is repeated  with the recurrence  of years, even though  it is 
minor  in rank than the prayers  of Tarawih  and both Ids, for it belongs  to those  
narrations  which  have been handed  down  on the authority  of individuals.  But I 
saw it better  to mention  it here because  I have found  that the unanimity  of the 
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  perform  it regularly,  and they reject  to leave  it.
As for the prayer  of Sha'ban,  it pertains  to the night of the middle  (i.e. the 
fifteenth  night)  of Sha'ban,  on which  one prays  one hundred  rak'ahs,  concluding  
each two with salutation,  in each rak'ah  of which  he recites  after  Al-Fatihah  "Say:  
'He is Allah,  the One and Only'"  eleven  times.
If he likes, he could  reduce  it to ten rak'ahs,  in each of which  he recites  after  
Al-Fatihah  "Say: 'He is Allah,  the One and Only"'  one hundred  times,  for this is 
handed  down  among  the supererogatory  prayers.
The early  men used to offer  this prayer,  which  they called  the prayer  of good,  
and they often gathered  and prayed  it in congregation.  It is narrated  that A1 
Hassan  said: Thirty  from amongst  the companions  of the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" told me that he, who offers  this prayer  
on this night, Allah Almighty  looks at him seventy  times, and with each He 
fulfills  a need for him, the least of which  is the forgiveness.
The Fourth  Category  Of Supererogatory  Prayers  Which  Pertain  To 
Occasional  Causes,  And Not To Fixed  Times
Those  include  nine prayers:  the eclipse  prayer,  the Istisqa'  (invoking  for water)  
prayer,  the two-rak'ah  prayer  of greeting  the mosque,  the two-rak'ah  prayer  of 
ablution,  the two-rak'ah  prayer  between  both  Adhan  and Iqamah,  the two-rak'ah  
prayer  on coming  out of, and entering  the house,  and the like of that; and let's 
mention  of them  what  occur  to our mind  at present.
The first is the eclipse  prayer.  In this issue,  it is narrated  by both sheikhs  on 
the authority  of Al-Mughirah  that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon him" said: "Verily,  both moon  and son are two of Allah's  signs,  
and they do not eclipse  for the death  nor they do for the life (birth)  of anyone.  
So, if you see that, hasten  to celebrate  (the Praises  of) Allah  and offer  prayer."  He 
said that when his son Ibrahim  died, and the son partially  eclipsed,  and the 
people  said: "It has eclipsed  for his (Ibrahim's)  death.
The time and way of performing  it
When  the sun eclipses  at a time in which  the prayer  is or is not undesirable,385


Page 388:
386 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
let's a caller make a public  announcement  that the people  should  gather  for 
congregational  prayer.  The imam then should  lead a two-rak'ah  prayer,  each of 
which  contains  two bowings,  the first of which  is longer  than the second.  He 
should  not recite  aloud  in the prayer.  Let him recite  in the first standing  of the 
first rak'ah  Al-Fatihah  and the Surah  of Al-Baqarah,  in the second  Al-Fatihah  and 
the Surah  of A1 Imran,  in the third (which  is the first standing  of the second  
rak'ah)  Al-Fatihah  and the Surah  of An-Nisa',  and in the fourth  Al-Fatihah  and 
the Surah  of Al-Ma'idah,  or as much  of the Qur ’an as is equal  to that, whereas  he 
likes. If he is satisfied  only with Al-Fatihah  in each standing,  it will be sufficient  
for him; and if he is satisfied  with the short Surahs,  there will be no harm.  
However,  the purpose  of prolonging  the prayer  as such is to keep praying  until it 
becomes  clear.  Let him exalt  Allah  in the first bowing  (of the first rak'ah)  as much  
as is equal to one hundred  Holy Verses,  in the second  as much  as is equal to 
eighty  Holy  Verses,  in the third  as much  as is equal  to seventy  Holy  Verses  and in 
the fourth  as much  as is equal to fifty Holy  Verses.  Let the prostration  in each  
rak'ah be in proportionate  with its related  bowing.  After the prayer,  let him 
deliver  two sermons,  with a sitting  (of break)  between  them,  and order  the people  
to give in charity,  emancipate  slaves,  and turn to Allah  in repentance.
Let him do the same  when  the moon  eclipses,  with the change  that he should  
recite  aloud since it is a night prayer.  Its time begins  with the beginning  of the 
eclipse,  and it ends  when  it becomes  clear.  The time for it also ends  when  the sun 
sets while  in eclipse.  The prayer  of the Moon  eclipse  passes  when  the disk of the 
sun appears,  since  it cancels  the dominion  of the night,  but it does not pass with  
the setting  of the moon,  for the moon  prevails  at the whole  night.  But if it clears  
in the midst  of the prayer,  let one complete  it quickly.  Whoever  catches  only the 
second Bowing  with the imam this rak'ah will have escaped  him, for the 
fundamental  point  is the first Bowing.
The second  is the prayer  of Istisqa'  (invoking  for water).  When  the water  of 
streams  runs off underground,  the rain is cut off, or a canal collapses,  it is 
desirable  for the imam to order the people  firstly to observe  three fasts, and 
spend  in charity  as much as is within  their capacity,  get rid of grievances  and 
injustices,  and turn to Allah  in repentance.  On the fourth  day, let him come  out 
with them,  in addition  to the old women  and children,  cleaned  and dressed,  in 
humility,  submission  and meekness,  unlike  their  state  in Id prayer.  It is said that it 
is desirable  to have the animals  also come  out, for they share  the need (for water)  
with men, depending  upon  the narration  of Al-Baihaqi  on the authority  of Abu  
Hurairah,  in which  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" said: "Had it been for the suckling  infants,  those old who (offer  prayer  in 
which  they) are bowing,  and those  animals  which  are feeding,  the punishment  (of 
Allah)  would  have  been  assuredly  poured  over  you."  If the non-Muslims  who live 
under  the authority  of Muslims  also come out in their company,  distinct  from  
them,  they  will not be forbidden.
When all gather  in the praying  place in an open space, a call should  be 
pronounced  that "Prayer  should  be performed  in congregation",  and the imam


Page 389:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
should  lead them  in a two-rak'ah  prayer,  like that of Id, with no Takbirs.  Then,  he 
should deliver  two sermons,  with a short sitting (of break) between  them,  
spending  the most portion  of his sermons  in asking  for Allah's  Forgiveness.  In 
the middle  of the second  sermon,  let him turn his back  to the people  and face the 
Qiblah,  and turn his cloak upside  down,  showing  pessimism  of changing  the 
state. As such did the Messenger  of AJLIah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon  
him". He should,  at that very moment,  make the upper  become  the lower  part,  
the right become  the left side, and the left become  the right side, and so should  
the people  do. At that time, let them supplication  in a low tone. Then,  let him 
face them,  and conclude  his sermon,  and they should  let their cloaks  turned  as 
such until they take them  off whenever  they take off their  garments.
Let him say in his supplication:  "O Allah!  You have commanded  us to invoke  
You, and promised  us to respond  to our invocation.  We have invoked  You as 
You ordered  us, so, please,  respond  to our invocation  as You promised  us. O 
Allah! Endow  us with forgiveness  for what we've committed  (of sins), and 
respond  to us by providing  us with water and enlarging  our sustenance."  It is 
desirable  also to supplicate  (as such) following  the obligatory  prayers  during  the 
three days prior to the coming  out. This supplication  has some  internal  manners  
and conditions,  pertaining  to repentance,  averting  injustices,  and the like of that,  
which  will be discussed  later  in the Book  of Supplication.
The third is the funeral  prayer,  and the way of performing  it is well-  
known,  and the most comprehensive  supplication  therein  is that which  has 
been handed  down through  an authentic  narration  (by Muslim)  on the 
authority  of Awf  Ibn Malik  who said: I saw the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace be upon him" having  performed  a funeral  prayer  and I 
retained  from him the following  supplication:  "O Allah! Forgive  him and 
bestow  mercy  upon  him; provide  him with health  and power,  and excuse  him 
(for his sins); receive  him generously  with honour,  make spacious  his grave;  
wash him with water, snow and hailstone,  and cleanse  him from sins and 
mistakes  in the same way as a white garment  is cleansed  from dirt;  
recompense  him with an abode  better  than his, a family  better  than his, and a 
spouse  better  than his (in the world);  admit  him to the Garden  and save him 
from the punishment  of the grave and from the punishment  of the fire (of 
Hell)",  thereupon  Awf (the narrator)  said: "I wished  I had been that dead  
(who  received  this supplication  from  the Prophet)."
Whoever  overtakes  only the second  Takbir,  let him observe  the sequence  of 
prayer  within  himself,  and utter Takbirs  with the imam;  and when the imam  
utters the End Salutation,  let him utter the Takbir  which  has escaped  him, the 
same as him who misses  any portion  of the prayer  which  he should  fulfill  once  
the imam  finishes  the prayer.  If one precedes  to utter  the Takbirs,  there  would  be 
no significance  of following  the imam  on the part of the one led in this prayer.  
Verily,  the Takbirs  act as the apparent  pillars,  and are worthy  of standing  in the 
same  position  of rak'ahs  in all the prayers.  This is, to me, the best opinion,  
though  others  are possible  too.387
even


Page 390:
388 The quarter  of the acts of worship
On the other hand, the narrations  which pertain  to the excellence  of the 
funeral  prayer  and following  the funeral  procession  are so much  famous  and we 
need not be long by mentioning  them  here. How should  it not be held excellent  
seeing  that it is one of those collective  obligations?  It is supererogatory  only in 
relation  to him upon whom it is not an individual  obligation  through  the 
presence  of someone  else, and (with whose  presence  on behalf  of him) he 
receives  the excellence  of the collective  obligation,  even though  it has not been  
binding  upon  him since others  undertook  the collective  duty on his behalf,  and 
exempted  others from the guilt of neglect,  unlike the supererogatory  prayer,  
which  could  not cancel  out any obligation  from  anyone.
It is desirable  to seek a congregation  of great number  (who undertake  this 
prayer)  for the sake of the blessing  of the prolific  solicitudes  and supplications,  
and in the hope of its including  him whose  invocation  receives  answer.  The  
reference  dependable  here is the narration  (of Muslim)  on the authority  of 
Kuraib,  the freed slave of Ibn Abbas  “Allah be pleased  with both ” that one of 
Ibn Abbas ’s sons died. He said: “O Kuraib!  Get out and see how many  people  
gathered  to attend  his funeral. ” I went out and found  that a lot of people  had 
gathered.  I returned  and told him. He asked:  “Do you guess  that they are (no less 
than) forty persons? ” I replied  in the affirmative.  He then said: “Take  him (the 
dead) out, for I heard The Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be 
upon  him” saying:  “No Muslim  person  who died, and (no less than) forty  men,  
associating  none with Allah (in worship)  attended  his funeral  (prayer),  but that 
Allah  would  accept  their  intercession  for him. ”
When  one sees off a funeral  and arrives  in or enters  the graveyard,  let him say: 
"Peace  be upon you, the inhabitants  of those  graves  from amongst  the faithful  
believers  and Muslims:  Allah's  Mercy  be upon  such of us as come  (here  by death)  
earlier or later, and we, Allah Willing,  are going to join you." It is more  
convenient  that he should  not leave  until the dead  is buried;  and once the earth  is 
levelled  on him, let him stand  at his grave  and say: "O Allah!  This is Your  servant  
who has been returned  to You: O Allah!  Be Merciful  and Kind to him. O Allah!  
keep the earth  away  from  both his sides,  open  the gates  of the heaven  to his soul,  
and accept  him with good acceptance.  O Allah!  If he is a good-doer,  multiply  his 
goodness,  and if he is an evil-doer,  excuse  him."
The fourth  is the prayer  of greeting  the mosque.  It is of two rak'ahs  and 
more,  whose  performance  is constant,  to the extent  that by no means  could  it be 
cancelled  out even if the imam is delivering  his sermon  on Friday,  with the 
stipulation  of being  attentive  to the preacher.  In case he is engaged  in performing  
an obligation  at its prescribed  time,  or fulfilling  a duty  which  is due upon  him, the 
prayer  of greeting  should  be offered,  therewith  he will receive  its great reward,  
since  the main  purpose  is not to have the commencement  of entering  the mosque  
free from any religious  service  pertaining  to the mosque,  in fulfillment  of the 
rights of the mosque.  For this reason,  it isundesirable  for one to enter the


Page 391:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
mosque  while his ablution  is broken.  But in case he enters,  only for the sake of 
crossing  or sitting,  let him say four times: Exalted  be Allah;  Praise  be to Allah;  
There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah;  and There  is no might  nor power  
but with Allah."  it is said that it is equal (in reward)  to the two-rak'ah  prayer  of 
greeting  die mosque.
According  to the doctrine  of Ash-Shafi'i,  the prayer  of greeting  the mosque  is 
not disliked  even at the times in which  the prayer  is undesirable,  i.e. after the 
obligatory  prayers  of both Fajr and Asr, the time of sun's decline  (passing  the 
meridian),  and the times  of both rising  and setting  of the sun. the reference  here  
is the narration  (of both  Sahihs  on the authority  of Umm  Salamah  and Muslim  on 
the authority  of A'ishah)  that the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon him" once offered  a two-rak'ah  prayer  after Asr. It was said to him:  
"Have  you not forbidden  us to do so?" he said: "This two-rak'ah  prayer  is that 
which  I was supposed  to offer after Zhuhr,  but the delegate  diverted  me from  
offering  them  (at that time)."
There  are two points  to be deduced  from that Hadith:  The first is that the 
undesirability  is restricted  only to that kind of prayer,  for which there is no 
justification,  and the weakest  of reasons  is the fulfillment  of the supererogatory  
prayers.  However,  the learned  men differ as to whether  the supererogatory  
prayers  should  or should  not be fulfilled,  and if one does the like of what has 
escaped  him, should  it be regarded  fulfillment  of what is due? If then the 
undesirability  is negated  even by the weakest  of reasons,  it should  rather be 
abrogated  by entering  the mosque,  which is a strong reason.  So, it is not 
undesirable  to perform  the funeral  prayer  once it is present,  the eclipse  prayer  
and the Istisqa'  prayer  at those  time,  in view  of their benefits  and advantages.
The second is the fulfillment  of the supererogatory  prayers,  since the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" fulfilled  (after  Asr 
prayer  the two-rak'ah  prayer  which  he used to offer after Zhuhr  prayer),  and in 
him we should  have a good pattern  (to follow).  (It is narrated  by Muslim  that)  
A'ishah  said: "Whenever  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon him" was overpowered  by fatigue  or slumber  and was hindered  from  
standing  on that night for the supererogatory  prayer),  he would  offer,  at the first 
portion  of the coming  day, twelve  rak'ahs."  According  to the learned  men,  when  
one is in prayer  and the response  to the Mu'adhdhin  escapes  him, and he utters  
salutation,  let him respond  to the Mu'adhdhin,  even though  he has stopped,  and 
then fulfill  substitute  prayer  in lieu.
Thus,  there is no significance  to be given to the statement  of him who says 
that this is like the first case, and it should  not be fulfilled;  for had it been so, no 
doubt,  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" would  
not have fulfilled  it in lieu at the time of undesirability.  It is true that if one has a 
daily  regular  division  from  which  he is hindered  (for some  reason  or another),  he 
should  be given  no concession  to leave  it: on the contrary,  he should  overtake  it389


Page 392:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
in another  time, lest he should  not be inclined  to comfort  and luxury.  It is good  
to overtake  it, by way of self-mortification  on the one hand,  and in accordance  
with the statement  of the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" (according  to the narration  of both Sahihs  on the authority  of A'ishah):  
"The  dearest  deed in the Sight  of Allah  is that which  is done  regularly,  no matter  
trivial  it might  be."
This means that one should  not be inconsistent  in doing his deeds. It is 
narrated  on the authority  of A'ishah  that the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon him" said: "Allah  Almighty  hates him who worships  Allah  
with a certain  act of worship  and then  leaves  it out of tedium."  So, let him beware  
of being  included  under  the risk of threat  and menace.  What  is affirmed  by that 
narration  is that Allah  Almighty  hates him who leaves  the religious  deed by way  
of weariness,  and had it not been for Allah's aversion  towards  him, and 
separation  (from His Presence),  such weariness  would  not have overpowered  
him.390
The fifth is two-rak'ah  prayer  to be offered  after performing  ablution.  This  
prayer  is desirable,  for ablution  is a religious  service,  whose  main purpose  is to 
offer prayer  through  it. furthermore,  the defilements  are to obstruct  (one from  
practicing  the worship),  and such defilement  might  happen  to break  the state of 
ablution  before  performing  the service,  with the result  that the endeavour  is lost.  
So, to hasten  to offer this two-rak'ah  prayer  is to fulfill  the purpose  of ablution  
before  it is broken.  This prayer  is verified  by the narration  (of both Sahihs  on the 
authority  of Abu Hurairah)  in which  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon him" said pertaining  to Bilal: "I entered  the Garden  and found  
Bilal there.  I asked  him: "O Bilal! By which  thing  have you preceded  me to the 
Garden?"  he said: "I do not know  but that I do not break  the state of my ablution  
but that I (perform  ablution  once  again  and) offer  a two-rak'ah  prayer  after  it."
The sixth is a two-rak'ah  prayer  to be offered  on entering  as well as on 
coming  out of the house.  In this respect  it is narrated  (by Al-Baihaqi)  on the 
authority  of Abu Hurairah  that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" said: "When  you come  out of your  house,  offer  a two-rak'ah  
prayer,  perchance  it would  avert the evil exit from  you; and when  you enter the 
house,  offer a two-rak'ah  prayer,  perchance  it would  avert from you the evil 
entrance."  This implies  the commencement  of each matter  of significance.  For 
this reason,  it is narrated  that (it is desirable  to) offer a two-rak'ah  prayer  on 
assuming  Ihram,  a two-rak'ah  prayer  on starting  a journey,  and a two-rak'ah  
prayer  on returning  from  journey  in the mosque  before  entering  the house.  All of 
this is handed  down  from  the practice  of the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon  him". It was the habit  of one of the righteous  good men to 
offer a two-rak'ah  prayer  whenever  he had a meal,  and whenever  he had a drink,  
and so he did in every  act that happened  to him.


Page 393:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer
The blessing  should  be sought  in the commencement  of anything,  through  the 
celebration  of Allah Almighty.  Those things are of three states: some recur  
frequently,  such as eating and drinking,  in which one should begin with  
mentioning  the Name  of Allah Almighty.  (It is narrated  by Abu Dawud,  An- 
Nasa'i,  Ibn Majah  and Ibn Hibban  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that) the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "Everything  
of significance  which  is not started  with "In the Name  of Allah,  Most  Gracious,  
Most  Merciful"  is cut off."
The second  is that which  is of importance,  even though  it does not recur  
frequendy,  such as holding  the de of marriage,  giving  advice  and counsel,  which  
is desirable  to be started  with praising  Allah  Almighty.  The one who holds  the tie 
of marriage  should  begin  with saying:  "Praise  be to Allah,  and Allah's  Blessing  be 
upon the Messenger  of Allah"  I've given  you my daughter  in marriage."  The one 
who accepts  marriage  should  say: "Praise  be to Allah, and Allah's  Blessing  be 
upon  the Messenger  of Allah:  I've accepted  the marriage."  It was the habit  of the 
companions  "Allah  be pleased  with them" to start their messages,  advises  and 
counsels  with praising  Allah  Almighty.
The third is that which does not recur frequendy,  but once it occurs,  it 
becomes  of permanence  and importance,  such as the journey,  buying  a new 
house,  assuming  Ihram,  and the like of that. It is desirable  to offer a two-rak'ah  
prayer  in advance  of all of those,  and the least of them  is entering  a house  and 
coming  out of it, for it is a kind of the short  journey.
The seventh  is the prayer  of Istikharah  (seeking  the guidance  of Allah  to what  
is better),  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him"  
commanded  him who intends  to do a thing, and he does not know its 
consequence,  and whether  it is good to leave or do it, to offer a two-rak'ah  
prayer,  in the first rak'ah  of which  he recites  Al-Fatihah  and "Say. 'O you who  
reject  faith'"  and in the second  Al-Fatihah  and "Say: 'He is Allah,  the One and 
Only"',  and when  he finishes  let him supplicate:  “O Allah!  I ask guidance  from  
your knowledge,  And Power  from  Your  Might  and I ask for your  great  blessings.  
You are capable  and I am not. You know  and I do not and you know  the unseen.  
O Allah!  If You know  that this job is good for my religion  and my subsistence  
and in my Hereafter  as well as for my present  and later needs  Then  You ordain  it 
for me and make  it easy for me to get, And then bless me in it. If You know  that 
this job is harmful  to me In my religion  and subsistence  and in the Hereafter  as 
well as for my present  and later needs  Then  keep it away from  me and let me be 
away  from  it. Ordain  for me whatever  is good  for me, and make  me satisfied  with  
it.” Then  the person  should  name  (mention)  his need."
This is narrated  by Al-Bukhari  on the authority  of Jabir Ibn Abdullah,  who  
said: The Prophet  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" used to teach  us how  
to ask Allah to guide one to what is right (concerning  any job or deed),  in all 
matters  as he taught  us the Surahs  of the Qur'an.  He said: "If anyone  of you 
thinks of doing any job he should  offer a two-rak ’ah-prayer  other than the391


Page 394:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
obligatory  ones and then name the matter  (concerning  which  he likes to seek  
Allah's  Guidance)",  and supplicate  with the supplication  which  we've  mentioned.  
According  to a wise man: "He, who gives four things,  will not be forbidden  four  
things  (in return):  whoever  gives thanks  will not be forbidden  (to be given)  more;  
and whoever  gives repentance  will not be forbidden  the acceptance  (of his 
repentance);  and whoever  gives (the prayer  of) seeking  the guidance  (of Allah  
Almighty  to what  is right  and better)  will not be forbidden  the better  choice;  and 
whoever  gives  counsel  will not be forbidden  (to be guided  to) the right."
The eighth  is the need prayer.  Whoever  is constrained  by necessity,  and for 
the interest  of his religion  and world forces  him to be in need for something  
which  is difficult,  let him offer this prayer.  It is narrated  (by Ad-Dailami)  on the 
authority  of Wuhaib  Ibn Al-Ward  that he said: "From  amongst  the invocations  
which  are not rejected  is that one offers  a twelve-rak'ah  prayer,  in each rak'ah  of 
which  he recites  Al-Fatihah,  the Holy  Verse  of the Throne,  and "Say: 'He is Allah,  
the One and Only'",  and when he finishes,  let him fall in prostration  and say: 
Exalted  be He, Who is dressed  in (the Dress  of) Power  and Honour  therewith  
He speaks;  Glorified  be He, Who covers Himself  in Glory therewith  He is 
Bountiful;  Glorified  be He, Who calculates  all things with His Knowledge;  
Glorified  be He, other  than Whom  none  else should  be exalted;  Glorified  be He, 
Lord of Grace and Favour;  Glorified  be He, Lord of Power,  Honour  and 
Generosity;  Glorified  be He, Lord of Might:  I ask You by the articulations  of 
Power  and Honour  in Your  Throne  (of Authority),  the utmost  degree  of mercy  
in Your Book, by Your Greatest  Name,  by Your Highest  Power,  by Your  
Comprehensive  Perfect  Words,  which  no dutiful  nor wicked  could  go beyond,  to 
send Your Prayer and Blessing  upon Muhammad  and upon the family of 
Muhammad."  Then, let him ask fro his need, in which there should  be no 
disobedience  to Allah,  and it will receive  answer,  Allah  Willing.  Wuhaib  said: We 
have been reported  that it was said: "You should  not teach that to the foolish  
weak-minded  among  you, lest they would back each other, through  it, in 
disobedience  of Allah  Almighty."
The ninth  is the prayer  of Tasbih;  and it is narrated  through  tradition  to be 
offered  randomly,  i.e. it is not unique  to a particular  time or occasion.  It is 
desirable  not to have  the week  or the month  free from  offering  it once  at least. In 
this issue it is narrated  (by Ibn Majah)  on the authority  of Ibn Abbas  that the 
Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him” said to Al-Abbas  
Ibn Al-Muttalib:  “O Abbas!  O my uncle!  Should  I not give you (a gift)?  Should  I 
not grant you? Should  I not be a source  of advantage  to you? Should  I not 
instruct  you ten things (which  plot out ten types of your sins): if you do that 
(which  I’m going  to tell you),  Allah  will forgive  you (the whole  of) your sins, the 
first and the last, the old and the new, that which  committed  by mistake,  and that 
which  is committed  intentionally,  the minor  and the major,  that which  is done  in 
secrecy  and that which  is done  in public?  Those  are ten things:  to offer a four-  
rak’ah prayer,  in each rak’ah, recite  the Opening  of the Book  and a Surah  (from  
the Qur ’an), and when  you finish  from  the recitation  in the first rak’ah, say while392


Page 395:
Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer  
you are standing:  “Glory  be to Allah;  praise  be to Allah;  there  is no god but Allah;  
Allah  is Greater ” fifteen  times;  then bow down,  and say it ten times  while  you are 
bowing  (besides  those  uttered  in the bowing);  then,  raise your head from bowing,  
and say it ten times  while standing;  then fall in prostradon,  and say it ten times  
while  you are prostrating  (besides  those said in the prostration);  then raise your  
head from prostration  and say it ten times  while  sitting;  then prostrate  and say it 
ten times;  and then raise your head from prostration  and say it ten times:  those  
are seventy-five  (statements)  to be uttered  in every  rak’ah, which  you have to say 
in the four rak’ahs. If you have power  to offer such a prayer  everyday,  do it; and 
if you could  not do , let it be every  Friday;  and if you could  not do, let it be every  
month;  and if you could  not do, let it be (at least) once  during  your lifetime. ”
According  to another  version,  it should  be said in the beginning  of this prayer:  
Exalted  be You, O Allah,  and by Your Praises  (I exalt You);  Blessed  be Your  
Name;  Exalted  be Your  Glory;  Hallowed  be Your  Names;  There  is no god (to be 
worshipped)  other than You." Then, let one exalt Allah fifteen times before  
recitation,  and ten times after recitation,  and the remaining  is according  to the 
previous  narration,  i.e. ten by ten. Let not him exalt  after the second  prostration  
while  sitting;  and this is more  fitting,  and it is the choice  of Ibn Al-Mubarak.  The 
total,  as shown  from both narrations,  is then three  hundred  Tasbihs:  if one offers  
this prayer  during  the day, let it be with one salutation,  and if he offers  it at night,  
let it be with two salutations;  and this is good,  since  what  has been handed  down  
to us attests  that the night prayer  should  be offered  in pairs of rak'ahs.  If one 
adds to those  Tasbihs:  "There  is no might  nor power  but with Allah,  Most  High  
Most  Great"  it is very  good  according  to many  narrations.
These  are the prayers  which transmitted  (from the Prophet);  and none of 
which  is desirable  to be offered  at those  times,  in which  prayer  is disliked,  barring  
the prayer  of greeting  the mosque.  But this exception  does not include  the two-  
rak'ah  prayer  to be offered  after ablution,  the two-rak'ah  prayer  of journey,  the 
two-rak'ah  prayer  of entering  and coming  out of the house,  and the two-rak'ah  
prayer  of seeking  Allah's  Guidance,  since the forbiddance  (of praying  at those  
times)  is confirmed,  and their  related  reasons  are weak,  and they do not rise up to 
the degree  of such prayers  as the eclipse,  invoking  for water,  and greeting  the 
mosque.  Furthermore,  I saw one of the Sufists  offering  the two-rak'ah  prayer  
after ablution  during  those times in which prayer  is undesirable;  and this is 
absurd,  since the ablution  itself  could,  by no means,  be a cause  of prayer:  on the 
contrary,  the prayer  itself  is the cause of performing  ablution.  To be sure, one 
performs  ablution  in order to pray, and does not pray just because  he has 
performed  ablution.
If everyone  that has been defiled  wishes  to pray at a time of undesirability  has 
no way but to perform  ablution  and then pray, there  will be no significance  to be 
given  to the undesirability.  One should  not state the intention  to offer the two-  
rak'ah  prayer  of ablution  in the same  way as he does in the case of the two-rak'ah  
prayer  of greeting  the mosque.  When  he performs  ablution,  he prays  two rak'ahs393


Page 396:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
voluntarily,  in order  that his ablution  should  not be idle, the same as Bilal did. 
This prayer  is voluntary  which occurs  just after the ablution.  The narration  
pertaining  to Bilal does not attest  that the ablution  might  be a cause  of prayer,  as 
strong  as that of eclipse  and greeting  (the mosque)  so that one should  state the 
intention  to offer the two-rak'ah  prayer  of ablution.  It is impossible  that one, by 
prayer,  should state the intention  to perform  ablution:  on the contrary,  by 
ablution,  one should  state the intention  to offer  prayer.  How  should  it be right  to 
say while  performing  ablution:  'I perform  ablution  for the sake of my prayer',  and 
say in his prayer:  'I pray because  of my ablution'?  if one likes to safeguard  his 
ablution  from idleness  during  the time of undesirability,  let him intend  to do a 
substitute  performance  in case, if it is possible,  a certain  prayer  is due upon  him,  
to which some defect  ahs found its way, for some reason  or another.  That's  
because  the substitute  performance  of prayer  during  the times  of undesirability  is 
rot disliked.
As for the intention  to offer voluntary  prayers during the times of 
undesirability,  there  is no consideration  for it, since the forbiddance  pertaining  to 
it has three important  points: the first is to safeguard  oneself  from the 
resemblance  of the sun worshippers.  The second  is to keep away  from  the spread  
of devil at those times, depending  upon (the narration  of An-Nasa'i  on the 
authority  of Abdullah  As-Sunabihi)  in which the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "Verily,  sun rises,  and there  appears  with it 
the horn of Satan:  when  it rises,  the devil joins it, and when  it is high,  he departs  
from  it; and when  it is at the meridian,  he joins  it, and when  it declines  and passes  
the meridian,  he leaves  it; and when  it is about  to set, he joins  it, and when  it sets,  
he leaves  it." he thus forbade  offering  prayer  at those  times,  showing  the reason  
for it.394
The third is that the followers  of the way to the hereafter  still offer prayers  
regularly  at all times  (during  the day and night);  and of a surety,  to do one item of 
religious  service  routinely  develops  weariness.  When  one is forbidden  to offer it 
even for a short  while,  this will make  him more  active  and desirous  (for offering  
it), seeing  that man, by nature,  is eager  to do what  is forbidden  to him. For this 
reason,  to be hindered  from prayer  at those times (of undesirability)  insdgates  
him to lie in expectation  for the passing  of time.  Thus,  those  times  were devoted  
to Tasbih  and Istighfar  (asking  for forgiveness),  in avoidance  of weariness  which  
results  from regularity  of performance,  and seeking  relief  by making  one move  
from one kind of religious  service  to another.  Verily,  it is delightful  to find and 
seek what is new, as well as it is bore to be continuous  routinely  on one thing.  
For this reason,  the prayer  has not been set to be solely prostration,  solely  
bowing,  or solely  standing:  on the contrary,  the worships  have been  ordered  from  
many kinds of acts and different  celebrations,  in such a way that the heart  
entertains  from each a new pleasure  on moving  to it; and had it been continuous  
on doing  one thing,  surely,  it would  have been swifter  to be a victim  of tedium  
and weariness.


Page 397:
395 Book  four:  The mysteries  and duties  of prayer
If those are serious  enough  to forbid  offering  prayer  at those times of 
undesirability,  in addition  to many  other  mysteries,  which  it is not within  the 
power  of mankind  to perceive,  but Allah  and His Messenger  know  them  best,  
those serious  things  could not be left but by means  of reasons,  which  are 
strong  in law, such as the fulfillment  of substitute  prayers,  the prayer  of 
invoking  for water, the prayer of eclipse,  and the prayer of greeting  the 
mosque.  What is weaker  than those should  not be made to encounter  the 
purpose  of the forbiddance.  This is the right in our sight;  and Allah  Almighty  
knows  best.


Page 398:
rVo>ii~Q■ '1 El“ *" ,-~no j i ■Li
In the Name  of Allah,  Most  Gracious,  Most  Merciful
Praise  be to Allah,  Who has blessed  some  with happiness  and reduced  others  
to wretchedness,  brought  some  to death  and others  to life, caused  some  to laugh,  
and others to weep, brought  some to existence,  and others to nonexistence,  
reduced  some  to poverty  and blessed  others  with richness,  caused  harm  to some  
and brought  good  to others,  it is He, Who has created  the animal  from  a sperm-  
drop.  Then,  he has set Himself  apart from  the creatures  by His attribute  of being  
Free of all wants  and needs.  He Almighty  has favoured  some  of His servants  with  
good,  by endowing  them,  out of His Bounty,  with His Graces  by which  he whom  
He pleases  has become  independent,  and made  such as endeavours  and toils, and 
has his sustenance  constricted  in need of Him,  by putdng  him to test and trial.
He Almighty  has made obligatory  charity  (Zakat)  one of the fundaments  of 
religion  on which  it is based,  and showed  that by virtue  of which  such of His 
servants  as doomed  to be purified  have been purified,  and through  which  the 
wealth  of the wealthy  who spends  out of it in charity  increases.  Allah's  blessing  
and peace be upon Muhammad,  the well-chosen,  the chief  of all mankind,  and 
the sun of guidance,  as well as upon his family  and companions,  who were  
characterized  by knowledge  and piety.
To go further:  Allah made the obligatory  charity  (Zakat)  one of the 
fundaments  upon  which  Islam  has been based,  and mentioned  it just after the 
prayer,  which  is the highest  religious  service,  as shown  from His saying:  " be 
steadfast  in prayer;  And practise  regular  charity."  (Al-Baqarah  83)
(It is unanimously  narrated  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that) the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "Islam  has 
been based  on five (pillars):  to bear testimony  to the fact that there  is no god (to 
be worshipped)  but Allah,  and that Muhammad  is His servant  and Messenger,  to 
establish  obligatory  prayer,  to practice  regular  charity..."  he Almighty  is strong  in 
His threat  to those  who indulge  in practicing  it when He says: " And there are 
those  who bury gold and silver  and spend  it not in the Way of Allah:  announce  
unto  them  a most  grievous  penalty."  (At-Tawbah  34)
^^1^3  jKJb  ^ f o^  oj * >
i (0) ^ AllJ*r-
To spend  in the Way of Allah  is to take out such of obligatory  charity  as due 
upon  his property.  Al-Ahnaf  Ibn Qais said in this respect:  I was in the company  
of a group  of the Quraish  men when  Abu Dharr  passed  by and said: "Announce  
unto the treasurers  (of wealth)  that they will be branded  in their back with a red-
396


Page 399:
Book  five: The mysteries  of obligatory  charity 397
heated  iron rod which  will penetrate  through  their chests,  and in the back of their  
heads  with a similar  rod which  will penetrate  through  their foreheads."  According  
to another  version:  "the red-heated  iron rod will be placed  on the nipples  of their  
breasts  and forced  through  to emerge  from the centre  of their shoulder-blades,  
and on the centre  of his shoulder-blades  and forced  through  to emerge  from  the 
nipples  of their  breasts  with shaking."
(It is narrated  by Muslim  on the authority  of) Abu Dharr  that he said: I went to 
the Messenger  of Allah  “Peace  be upon  him” and he was sitting  under  the shade  of 
the Ka’bah. When  he saw me he said: <cBy the Lord of the Ka'bah!  They are the 
losers. ” I came  there  until I sat. I could  not stay (any more)  and stood  up. I asked:  “O 
Messenger  of Allah!  Let my father  and mother  be sacrificed  for you! Who are those  
(losers)? ” He said: “They  are those,  who have a great  wealth  except  so and so and so 
(i.e. those  who spend  their  wealth  on whomever  they find) in front  of them,  behind  
them,  on their right and on their left; and how a few they are! No owner  of camels,  
catde  or goat and sheep  does not give in charity  but that those  (animals)  would  come  
on the Day of Judgement,  more fleshy  than they have ever been, and they would  
gore him with their  horns  and trample  him with their  hoofs.  The more  the last would  
pass away, the more the first would  return  (to trample  him once again) until it is 
judged  among  the people. ”
Since  this severe  warning  is (authentic,  as long  as it is) narrated  in both  Sahihs,  
it has become  one of the religion's  tasks to uncover  the mysteries  of obligatory  
charity  (Zakat),  its apparent  and invisible  conditions,  its outward  and inward  
meanings,  with restriction  to what  is indispensable  for both the almsgiver  and i| 
recipient  to know.  All of that could  be uncovered  in four chapters:
Chapter  one: on the different  kinds of obligatory  charity  (Zakat),  and the 
causes  of its obligation.
Chapter  two: on its proprieties  and its outward  and inward  conditions.
Chapter  three: on the recipient  of the obligatory  charity  (Zakat),  and the 
conditions  and manners  by which  he is worthy  of receiving  it.
Chapter  four: On the voluntary  charity  (Sadaqat)  and its excellence.
CHAPTER  ONE:  ON THE DIFFERENT  KINDS  OF OBLIGATORY  CHARITY  
(ZAKAT)  AND  THE CAUSES  OF ITS OBLIGATION
The kinds of obligatory  charity,  in relation  to its appurtenances,  are six: the 
obligatory  charity  due upon  livestock  (of catde  and sheep);  the obligatory  charity  
due upon currency  of both (gold and silver);  the obligatory  charity  due upon  
merchandise;  the obligatory  charity  due upon buried  treasures  and mines;  the 
obligatory  charity  due upon land yields; and the obligatory  charity  due upon  
breaking  the fast (of Ramadan).
The First Kind:  The Obligatory  Charity  Due Upon  Livestock
This kind of obligatory  charity,  as well as the other  kinds,  is not due but upon  
a free Muslim,  without  stipuladng  his attaining  the age of puberty,  since it is due 
upon  the property  of even the child  as well as the insane.  This condition  pertains  
to him upon  whom  it is binding.


Page 400:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 398
There are five conditions  which pertain  to the property,  upon which the 
obligatory  charity  is due: It should  be livestock;  such should  be maintained  on 
pasturing;  a whole  uninterrupted  year should  have passed  upon  it while  being  in 
the possession  of the almsgiver;  it should  be equal  to the minimum  limit  at which  
Zakat  becomes  due; it should  be wholly  owned  (by the almsgiver).  (Let's  explain  
each in detail).
The first condition:  that it should  be livestock,  it is well-known  that 
the obligatory  charity  is due only upon  camels,  catde  and sheep.  This means  that 
no obligatory  charity  is due upon horses,  mules and donkeys,  as well as cross ­
breed  of deers  and sheep.
The second  condition:  that it should be pasturing,  there is no 
obligatory  charity  upon such of animals  as fodder  constitutes  their main food;  
and if (during  the year which  should  pass on the livestock  to be liable to charity)  
they were maintained  through  pasturing  for some time, and through  fodder  for 
another  time, because  of which there appeared  a need to supply  them with  
provision,  no obligatory  would  be due upon  them.
The third  condition:  the uninterrupted  year-possession  of property.  In 
this respect,  (it is narrated  by on the authority  of that) the Messenger  of Allah  
"Peace  be upon  him" said: "No obligatory  charity  is due upon  a property  before  a 
whole  year has passed  on it (while  being  in the full possession  of the almsgiver)."  
The yield of property  is exempted  from that, since it is subject  to the same rule 
which governs  the property;  and thus the obligatory  charity  is due upon it 
because  of the uninterrupted  year-possession  of its source.  This year might  be 
interrupted  when  the property  is sold or granted.
The fourth  condition:  the full possession,  which  gives the owner  the 
power of authority  to dispose  of what he owns. Alms are due upon the 
mortgaged  cattle,  since it is the owner  himself  who has limited  his legal power  
over it. but it is not due on what has been lost or illegally  usurped,  unless  it 
returns  with its yields,  and in this case, the alms should  be due upon it on its 
return,  along the time passed  (while  being  lost or usurped).  If one is in debt,  
which  is to take up his property,  no obligatory  charity  should  be due upon him,  
for in this case, he will not be wealthy  with it, for indeed,  the wealth  which  makes  
one rich is what  is beyond  the need.
The fifth condition:  this pertains  to the attainment  of the minimum  
limit (at which  alms become  due). As far as camels  are concerned,  no obligatory  
is due upon  them  unless  they reach  five, and in this case, a one-year-old  sheep  or 
a two-year-old  goat become  due. Two sheep are due upon (a property  of) ten 
camels;  three sheep  are due upon fifteen  camels;  four sheep  are due upon  twenty  
camels.  But in case they are twenty-five  camels,  a one-year-old  she-camel  
becomes  due, and in case a one-year-old  she-camel  is available,  let it be a two-  
year-old  male camel,  if it is available.  In case they are thirty-six  camels,  a two-  
year-old  she-camel  is due. If they reach forty-six  camels,  a three-year-old  she-  
camel  is due. If they reach sixty-one,  a four-year-old  she-camel  becomes  due. If 
they reach seventy-six,  two two-year-old  she-camels  become  due. If they reach1-
2-
3-
4-
5-


Page 401:
Book  five: The mysteries  of obligatory  charity 399
ninety-one,  two three-year-old  she-camels  become  due. If they reach up to one 
hundred  and twenty-one,  three two-year-old  she-camels  become  due. If they  
reach  up to one hundred  and thirty  (and more),  the calculation  has been fixed as 
a three-year-old  she-camel  is due upon each fifty, and two-year-old  she-camel  is 
due upon  each forty.
As far as cows are concerned,  nothing  is due unless  they reach up to thirty,  
upon  which  a one-year-old  calf is due; and in case they are forty,  a two-year-old  
she-cow  is due; and in case they are sixty, two one-year-old  calfs are due. If they  
are more than sixty, the calculation  has been fixed as a one-year-old  calf is due 
upon  each thirty,  and a two-year-old  she-cow  is due upon  each forty.
As far as sheep are concerned,  nothing  is due unless they are forty, upon  
which  a one-year-old  sheep  or a two-year-old  goat is due. Nothing  is due upon  
them after that until they reach one hundred  and twenty-one,  upon which  two 
sheep  are due; and in case of two hundred  and one, three sheep  are due; and in 
case of four hundred,  four sheep are due. After that the calculation  has been  
fixed  as a single  sheep  is due upon  each hundred.
The rule which  governs  the obligatory  charity  due upon ProPerty °f s°k 
owner  is true alsoof the property  jointly  owned  by two in partnership.  Thus  if forty  
sheep are jointly  owned  by two persons,  a one-year-old  sheep or two-year-old  
goat  is due upon  them;  and if one hundred  and twenty  sheep  are jointly  owned  by 
three persons,  a single  sheep  is due upon  them all. Partnership  of neighbours,  in 
its liability  to the obligatory  charity , is exactly  like joint partnership,  on the condition  
that their sheep should  be herded  together  in the same place, taken to drink  
together  (at the same source  of water),  milked  together,  graze together  in the 
same pasture,  and their mating  be carried  at the same time and place.  Above  all, 
the partners  should  be included  in those upon whom  the obligatory  charity  is 
due, for the partnership  of the Muslem  with the a non-Muslim  lining  under  Muslims'  
power,  and the slave who has a written  deed of emancipation  for a certain  sum of 
money  is ineffective.
To give as obligatory  charity  a younger  camel  than the one prescribed  by law is 
permissible,  provided  that the given camel  should  not be younger  than a one-  
year-old  she-camel,  on the condition  that one should  mend  the situation  for the 
age of the camel,  on the basis that a camel  one year younger  than the prescribed  
age requires  a recompense  of two goats or twenty  Dirhams;  one two years  
younger,  four sheep or forty Dirhams.  Furthermore,  camels older than the 
prescribed  age might  be taken as obligatory  charity  provided  that they are not 
older than a four-year-old  she-camel,  and in this case, the owner  is entitled  to be 
recompensed  from the treasury  officials.
No sick camel  should  be accepted  as obligatory  chanty  when  one sound  camel  is 
found among  the herd upon which the obligatory  chanty  is due. From among  
thorough-bred  camels  a thorough-bred  is taken  and from among  the half- bred,  a 
half-bred  should  be taken. No sheep fattened  for slaughtering  and eating  or 
gravid  , nor sheep  which  has just brought  forth,  nor male,  nor the best among  the


Page 402:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 400 --------------------------------------------------
flock  should  be taken  (as obligatory  charity).
The Second  Kind:  The Obligatory  Charity  Due Upon  The land YieSds
One-tenth  the edible  plants  (of foodstuff),  which  is as much  as no less than  
eight hundred  manebs,  is due as obligatory  charity;  and nothing  is due upon a 
quantity  less than that amount.  Nothing  is due upon fruits nor cotton.  But it is 
due upon  edible  grains,  in addition  to dates  and raisins,  provided  that the amount  
should  be eight hundred  manebs  of dates or raisins,  and not of fresh dates or 
grapes.  The obligatory  charity  due upon those should  be taken out after drying.  
The property  of a partner  in this respect  should  be completed  with the property  
of the other,  according  to the common  partnership,  such as the garden  which  is 
jointly  owned  by a group  of heirs, the crop of which  amounts  to eight hundred  
manebs  of raisins,  eighty  manebs  of raisins  are due on all of them together,  each  
to pay in proportion  to his share.  This, however,  does not apply to partnership  
among  neighbours.
The minimum  limit of wheat,  for example,  could not be supplemented  with  
parley  (and vice versa);  but that of parley  could be completed  with thin-husked  
barley,  since it is of the same species.  This is the due amount  of what  is watered  
by an inundation  or a canal. But only one-twenty  is due upon what is watered  
with the help of a camel (used for carrying  water) or artificial  means  through  
taking  water  from  canals,  tanks,  drains,  etc. if irrigation  is done  by both ways,  the 
consideration  should  be built  upon  that which  prevails.
As to the quality  of the obligatory  charity,  it should  be known  that dry dates,  dry 
raisins,  and dry grains  are accepted.  Neither  grapes  nor fresh dates are accepted  
unless  an epidemic  should  befall the trees and demand,  which  should  be cut 
down  before  their fruit is ripe for the sake of the general  interest.  In that event  
fresh dates may be collected  on the basis that nine-tenths  will be set aside for 
the owner,  and one-tenth  for the poor. That the division  of property  is a kind  
of selling  does not prevent  such division,  for indeed  it is permissible  because  of 
necessity.  The obligatory  charity  is due at the time when the benefit  of the fruits  
becomes  evident,  and the grains  grow hard,  whereas  it should  be fulfilled  after  
being  dried.
The Third  Kind:  The Obligatory  Charity  
Due Upon  Both Gold  And Silver
When  a whole  year has passed  with a weight  equal to two hundred  sterling  
Dirhams  (of silver  while  being  in the possession  of somebody)  according  to the 
Meccan  weight,  five Dirhams  become  due, and this is equal  to one-fortieth;  and if 
it is even a single Dirham  more, its obligatory  charity  should  be calculated  
according  to this rate. The minimum  limit of gold (at which  Zakat  is due) is 
twenty  sterling  Dinars  according  to the Meccan  weight,  upon  which  one-fortieth  
is due; and what is more should be calculated  according  to that rate. No 
obligator)''  charity  is due if that amount  is short  of even a single  grain. It is also 
due upon  him who has counterfeit  money,  if they contain  this minimum  amount  
of pure metal.  The obligatory  charity  is also due upon  the gold and silver  bullions


Page 403:
Book  five: The mysteries  of obligatory  charity  
and the forbidden  ornament  (of gold and silver,  such as the utensils  of gold and 
silver, and the couches  of gold owned  by the rich men. It is due upon the 
permissible  ornament.  It is also due upon the debt of a solvent  person  capable  of 
paying  his debt, in which event it is due at the time of fulfillment.  If the 
fulfillment  of the debt has been deferred  to a fixed date, the obligatory  charity  is not 
due until that date comes.
The Fourth  Kind:  The Obligatory  Charity  Due Upon  Merchandise
It is the same as the obligatory  charity  of both gold and silver,  but here the 
year is reckoned  from the very time in which  one possesses  the money  therewith  
he has purchased  the goods,  in case this money  has reached  the minimum  
amount  liable  to the obligatory  charity.  But in case that money  is less than that, or 
if one buys (the goods)  with the intention  to practice  traffic,  the year should  be 
reckoned  from the very time of purchase.  The obligatory  charity  here should  be 
fulfilled  in the currency  prevalent  in that town (or country),  in terms  of which  its 
value  is estimated.  If the money  with which  the goods  were purchased  belonged  
to a certain  monetary  unit, and equal  to exactly  the minimum  amount  liable  to the 
obligatory  charity  it would  be better  to calculate  the obligatory  charity  on the basis of 
the same monetary  unit with which  the good  were  purchased  than on that of the 
currency  prevalent  in the city or country.
On the other hand, if one has the intention  to practice  traffic by way of 
investing  such of his property  as he has saved,  the year should  not be reckoned  
just from  the time of his intention,  but from the very time of purchase.  If, before  
the year elapses,  the person  drops  his intention  of investing,  the fulfillment  of the 
obligatory  charity  falls out. It is, however,  better  to fulfill the obligatory  charity  for 
that year.
Whatever  profit  may accrue  at the end of the year is liable to the obligatory  
charity  through  the year of the capital,  and will not have a special  year reckoned  
for it as is the case with the offspring  of animals.  As to money-changers,  the 
continuity  of the year on the basis of which the obligatory  charity  due on their  
money  is calculated  is not interrupted  by the exchange  of the money  among  them  
as it is interrupted  with exchange  of other kinds of merchandise.  The obligatory  
chanty  due upon the profits  which  accrue  to the money-lender  is due upon the 
lender  himself,  i.e. upon his share of the profit, even before  distributing  the 
shares.  This is the most  standard  practice.
The Fifth Kind:  The Alms  Due Upon  Buried  Treasures  And Mines
The buried  treasure  applies  to such (of gold,  silver  and any precious  metals)  as 
had been buried  during  the pre-Islamic  period  of ignorance  and was found  in a 
certain  land which  has not fallen under  the possession  of anyone  in Islam.  The 
finder  of such buried  treasure  should  pay one-fifth  such of gold and silver  as he 
finds (to the state),  with no consideration  to be given to the elapse  of a whole  
year in this respect.  It is also better  to give no consideration  to the minimum  
amount  liable  to the obligatory  charity,  for the obligation  of paying  one-fifth  (the 
property)  is confirmed  to what  is similar,  i.e. the war booty,  and considering  such401


Page 404:
402 The quarter  of the acts of worship
(minimum  amount  liable  to Zakat)  is not unlikely,  in view  of the fact that the way 
of spending  both  is one. For this reason,  it (its liability  to Zakat)  is limited  to both  
gold and silver.
As for mines,  no obligatory  charity  is due upon  any of metals  barring  gold and 
silver, upon which, after being extracted  and refined,  one-fortieth  is due 
according  to the more authentic  of both authorities.  Based upon that, the 
minimum  limit liable to Zakat is considerable.  But there are two opinions  
pertaining  to the elapse  of a whole  year. It is not considerable  according  to the 
opinion  that assures  the one-fifth.  There are two opinions  pertaining  to the 
minimum  limit  liable  to Zakat;  and the more  reliable  of them,  and Allah  Almighty  
knows  best,  is that, in relation  to the amount  of Zakat,  it should  be subject  to the 
same rule which  governs  the obligatory  charity  due upon  merchandise,  for it is a 
kind of profit-making,  and in relation  to the elapse of a whole year, to the 
obligatory  charity  due upon the land yields. In this way, no period  as such is 
required,  since  this is the most  sensible  course.  A minimum  limit  liable  to Zakat  is 
required  in this respect  as it is required  in land yields.  The safest  course  is to set 
aside  one-fifth  of all buried  treasures  and mines  regardless  of their  amount  and of 
whether  or not they are gold or silver, in order to avoid these uncertain  
distinctions  and differences,  all of which are speculative  and close to be 
contradictory.  It is dangerous  to lay down  hasty  and strict  verdicts  in view of the 
contradictory  nature  of these  conjectures.
The Sixth  Kind:  The Alms  Of Breaking  The Fast
It is obligatory,  on the tongue  of the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" upon  every  Muslim,  from  what  is left over  of the sustenance  
of him as well as of those  he sustains.  It is to be given  on the night  and day of 
breaking  the fast (of the month  of Ramadan,  as closing  date), in a form of a 
measure  of the foodstuff  on which he is maintained,  in accordance  with the 
measure  of the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him",  i.e. 
two and two- thirds manebs.  It should  be taken out of the same kind of his 
foodstuff,  or any kind superior.  If his sustenance  is wheat,  parley  would not 
suffice  him; and if it is of different  grains,  let him choose  the best and most  
superior  of them;  and it suffices  him to take it out of whichever  he likes of them.
Its distribution  is the same as that of the obligatory  charity  due upon the 
property.  In it, all beneficiaries  should  be covered.  It is impermissible  to give it 
from flour  or parched  barley.  It is incumbent  upon  a Muslim  to give the alms of 
breaking  fast on behalf  of his wife, children,  slaves,  and everyone  of his kith and 
kin of whom  he is responsible,  i.e. those  whose  support  is incumbent  upon  him,  
just as his father, mother  and children.  In this respect  (according  to an 
unidentified  narration)  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon him" said: "Pay the alms of breaking  fast on behalf  of those whom  you 
sustain."
Furthermore,  the alms of breaking  fast on behalf  of the jointly  owned  slave  is 
due upon  both partners;  and no alms as such is binding  on behalf  of an infidel


Page 405:
Book  five: The mysteries  of obligatory  charity  
slave. If a wife donates  to pay the alms on her behalf  from her property,  it 
suffices  her; and her husband  has the right to give it on her behalf,  without  
seeking  her leave.  If something  is left over to pay such alms on behalf  of some  of 
his dependents,  let him pay it on behalf  of them;  and the most fitting  of them  to 
be preferred  in this issue is that, whose support  is better confirmed.  The 
Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" gave preference  to the support  of one's  
child  over  that of his wife,  and that of his wife over that of his servant.
Those  are the legal rules of jurisprudence  (concerning  the obligatory  charity)  
which  are necessary  for him who wishes  to be independent  from  others  to know;  
and beyond  that, some  rare cases might  encounter  him, in connection  with which  
case he should  seek the religious  verdicts,  after having  grasped  this amount  of 
knowledge.403
CHAPTER  TWO:  ON THE FULFILLMENT  OF ALMS  AND ITS OUTWARD
AND INWARD  CONDITIONS
It should  be known  that the almsgiver  should  observe  five things:
The first pertains  to the intent.  That is to say, the almsgiver  should  have the 
intention,  within  his heart,  to pay the obligatory  charity  due upon him; and it is 
not incumbent  upon  him to set apart  the property  (upon  which  he is going  to pay 
the alms). Based upon that, if he has property  which is under absentee  
possession,  and he says: "This is the obligatory  charity  due upon my property  
which is under absentee  possession,  in case it is safe, otherwise,  let it be a 
supererogatory  deed",  it will be permissible,  because  he has not assigned  a certain  
property;  and this applies  to the property  referred  to in general  terms.
The intent  of a guardian  takes the position  of that of the mad and child (under  
his guardianship);  and the intent  of a magistrate  takes the position  of that of the 
owner  who reftises  to give alms,  but in so far as the outward  aspects  of this world  
are concerned,  i.e. in so far as it cancels  out the demand  from him. But as far as 
the hereafter  is concerned,  it does nothing:  on the contrary,  he continues  to be 
held responsible  for it until he resumes  giving  it. it suffices  him, in case he 
delegates  a deputy  to pay the alms on his behalf,  to declare  the intent  (of paying  
the Zakat)  at the time of delegation,  or to delegate  the deputy  with intention;  and 
that's because  to entrust  the deputy  with intent  is regarded  to be an intent  in 
itself.
The second  is to be prompt  to fulfill  it once the whole  year has elapsed;  and 
as far as the alms of breaking  fast is concerned,  it should  not be delayed  beyond  
the day of breaking  fast. It becomes  due with the setting  of the sun of the last day 
of the month  of Ramadan;  and the whole  month  of Ramadan  is fitting  for being  
prompt  to pay it. he, who delays to fulfill the obligatory  charity  due upon his 
property  even though  he is capable  of paying  it has, indeed,  disobeyed  (the 
commandments  of Allah),  and the damage  of his property  will not cancel  it out 
of him. But in case the cause  of his delay  is the absence  of the beneficiaries,  and 
subsequently,  his property  has been  damaged,  the obligation  of payment  then  will 
fall out of him.


Page 406:
404 The quarter  of the acts of worship
However,  it is permissible  to pay the alms in advance,  provided  that the limit  
amount  liable  to alms has been obtained,  and a whole  year has elapsed.  It is also 
permissible  to pay the obligatory  chanty  of two years in advance.  If the obligatory  
charity  is paid in advance  and then,  before  the end of the year, the poor man (the 
beneficiary)  should  die, renegade  to infidelity,  or grow independendy  rich, or if 
the property  of the owner  should  be given  to damage  or he should  die, the sum  
which  had been paid in advance  would  not be regarded  a part of the obligatory  
charity  and cannot  be restored  unless  it had been so stipulated  at the time of 
payment.  Therefore,  let him who pays the obligatory  charity  in advance  watch  the 
ends  of matters  and the safe outcomes.
The third is That nothing  should be offered  as the obligatory  charity in 
substitution  of  another  based  on the value.  The stipulated  obligatory  charity  itself  should  
be set aside  and paid.  Thus  silver  will not take the place  of gold,  nor will gold take  
the place of silver,  even though  the substitute  may exceed  that for which  it was 
substituted.
Perhaps  some of those who do not understand  the purpose  of Shafi'i  may  
indulge  in that matter,  and give concession  to the substitution  of one thing for 
the other  on the ground  that the main  purpose  of the whole  thing  is to satisfy  the 
need.  But how far is this from the true knowledge  of the law. For while  satisfying  
the need constitutes  one of its purposes,  in no way could  it be the only purpose.  
The purposes  of the law are three  which  go as follows:
The first purpose  of the law is pure devotion  in which there is no share  for 
personal  considerations  or desires,  just as, for example,  the throwing  of the 
pebbles  at the Jarnrahs:  nothing  could  affect  the Jamrah  with the falling  pebbles.  In 
this case the main purpose  of the law is to put man to trial through  action,  in 
order that he may show his servitude  and bondage  to Allah by means  of acts 
which  have no reasonable  meaning.  For the mind  might  aid and urge man to do 
those  acts which  have reasonable  meaning.  Consequently,  reasonable  acts do not 
illustrate  man's  perfect  servitude  and bondage  to Allah.  Real servitude  to Allah  is 
disclosed  through  full obedience  to His orders  and not through  obedience  for 
some  other  reason.  Thus the most  part of the activities  (done  during)  Hajj are, in 
themselves,  void of any reasonable  meaning.  For this reason,  the Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said while assuming  Ihram:  "I 
respond  to Your  Call O Allah  with Hajj through  which  I display  my devotion  and 
servitude."  He did so in order to show that man proves  his bondage  to Allah  
through  full obedience  to His orders  regardless  of whether  they are or they are 
not acceptable  to him and of whether  he is or is not liable  and inclined  to submit  
to them.
The second  purpose  of the Law pertains  to a reasonable  share  rather  than to 
pure devotion,  just as, for example,  fulfilling  human  debts and restoring  to men  
whatever  is usurped  from them.  Thus  there  is no crime  in which  the act itself,  as 
well as the intent  are not taken  in consideration.  Furthermore  whenever  the right  
or its substitute  is restored  to its owner  in such a way as is agreeable  to him, the 
demand  of the law will have been fulfilled,  and it will have no claim.  These  two


Page 407:
Book  five: The mysteries  of obligatory  charity
purposes  of the law are free of complexities  and all men join in understanding  
them  well.
The third purpose  of the law is composed  of the former  two, namely  the 
benefit  of mankind  and the trial of man by means  of bondage.  Thus,  therein  is a 
mixture  of acts of pure devotion  like the throwing  of the pebbles,  and human  
benefits  like the restoration  of the usurped  rights.  The latter  is reasonable.  But if 
it is ordained  by the law, the two purposes  then should  inevitably  be combined,  
furthermore,  the finer of the two purposes,  namely  devotion  and servitude,  
should  never be ignored  on account  of the more apparent  one (i.e. human  
benefit).  More  likely  the finer  of both is more  important.
The obligatory  charity  belongs  then to this (third)  kind. No one proved  wakeful  to 
this fact except  Shafi'i.  on the one hand, the benefit  of the poor serves the 
purpose  of satisfying  the need, which  is quite clear and readily  comprehended.  
On the other  hand,  the right of devodon  serves  the purpose  of tracing  the details  
relevant  to the obligatory  charity.  In this respect,  the obligatory  charity  has been joined  
to prayer  and pilgrimage,  as being  one of the pillars  of Islam.  No doubt  man has 
to endeavour  to distinguish  the different  kinds of his property  and set aside a 
portion  of each and distribute  what he had set aside among  the eight groups  as 
will be discussed  later. To indulge  in this point  will not diminish  the benefits  of 
the poor  but will surely  stand  against  devotion.
That devotion  is intended  by the special  treatment  with which  the different  
kinds (in the obligatory  charity)  are dealt is attested  by many things  which  we have  
discussed  under controversial  points in books of jurisprudence.  One of the 
clearest  of these is that the law ordains  as obligatory  charity  a sheep  due upon  
every five camels,  thereby  substituting  the sheep for the camel without  the 
substitution  of gold and silver. Were this to be justified  by the shortage  of 
currency  of gold and silver  among  the Bedouins,  the justification  would  be held  
invalid  when  it is mentioned  that the Messenger  of Allah stipulated  that the sum  
of twenty  Dirhams  or two sheep  should  be given  in compensation  when  the age 
of the camel  given  as obligatory  charity  is younger  than what  it should  be. However,  
the Messenger  of Allah did not mention  the amount  of shortage  in value in 
connection  with the compensation  required,  estimated  at twenty  Dirhams  or two 
sheep  seeing  that garments  and vessels  of any kind were all of the same value  as 
substitutes.
These  and other special  treatments  alike indicate  that although  the obligatory  
charity  has not been left free from  devotional  significance,  it is different  from Hajj  
which  is merely  devotional,  in so far as it combines  both (the reasonable  benefits  
and the devotional  deeds). But since feeble minds fail to understand  the 
complicated  things,  this might  lead to errors  in this field.
The fourth  is that the objects  of the obligatory  charity  should  not be 
transferred  from town to town, for the needy  and indigent  in every  town are 
in the habit of watching  its property  and wealth,  and the transference  (of this 
property)  might  disappoint  them. But anyway,  if he does so, it will be valid,  
according  to an opinion;  even though  to avoid  the uncertainty  resulting  from405


Page 408:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
the difference  (of views  in this matter)  is much better.  So, let the obligatory  
charity  due upon the property  of every  town be brought  out and distributed  
among  its people;  and there  is no harm  to give out of that the strangers  within  
this town.
The fifth is that he should  distribute  (the obligatory  charity  due upon) his 
property  among  the (eight)  groups  (of beneficiaries)  in his homeland  since it is 
obligatory  to include  them (in the distribution);  and this is attested  by the 
apparent  meaning  of the saying  of Allah  Almighty:  " Alms  are for the poor and 
the needy,  and those  employed  to administer  the (funds);  for those  whose  hearts  
have  been (recently)  reconciled  (to the truth);  for those  in bondage  and in debt;  in 
the cause  of Allah;  and for the wayfarer:  (thus is it) ordained  by Allah,  and Allah  
is full of knowledge  and wisdom."  (At-Tawbah  60)
43 4) :>l'i  3 iIjJ $ f
4 j g*\3
This is similar  to the statement  of a sick: "One-third  of my property  be to the 
poor  and needy."  This requires  the partnership  in possession.  However,  as far as 
the acts of worship  are concerned,  one should  safeguard  himself  from adhering  
only to the apparent  aspects.
From  those  eight the most  countries  are short  of two, i.e. those  employed  to 
administer  the (funds),  and those  whose  hearts  have  been (recently)  reconciled  (to 
the truth).  Four of them  are widespread  in all countries,  i.e. the poor,  the needy,  
the debtors,  and the wayfarers.  The other  remaining  two exist  in some  countries,  
i.e. those  in bondage  and the fighters  in the Cause  of Allah  Almighty.  Based  upon  
that, if there are five of those groups  in one's homeland,  let him divide the 
obligatory  charity  upon his property  into five portions,  whether  equal or nearly  
so, and assign  a part for each group,  and then divide  each part into three  or more  
equal  or unequal  shares.
Yet, it is not necessary  for him to divide each share equally  among  the 
members  of the one group  of beneficiaries,  but may divide  it, if he wishes,  into  
ten or even twenty  shares,  and in this case the portion  of each individual  within  
the same group will necessarily  diminish.  The division  of the obligatory  charity  
among  the different  groups  should not be subject  to increase  or decrease:  
nothing  should  be taken from the one and added  to the other  but all should  be 
equal. The share of each group should not be divided  into less than three  
portions.  Thus if the amount  of the aim of breaking  fast of Ramadan  is one 
measure  of any foodstuff  and there are five groups  of beneficiaries  in the town,  
the almsgiver  should  divide  the alms among  fifteen  men. Should  one man be left 
out and thus he will not receive  his portion,  the almsgiver,  if it is possible,  should  
supply  that portion  from his own property.  But if this is not possible  because  of 
the litdeness  of the obligatory  charity, let some of those who are liable to the 
obligatory  charity  gather  their dues and collect  the beneficiaries  and give that to 
them,  so that they might  share  it, for indeed  doing  so is necessary.406


Page 409:
Book  five: The mysteries  of obligatory  charity ----------------------------------
On The Exposition  Of The Details  Of The Inward  Manners  
Pertaining  To The Obligatory  Charity
It should  be known  that there are several  duties  incumbent  upon the seeker  
after  the way to the hereafter,  which  go as follows:
The first duty: to have understand  well the obligation  and significance  of the 
obligatory  charity,  and the consideration  which  makes  it a means  of putting  man  
to trial, and the reason  why it has been made one of the foundations  of Islam,  
although  it is just a financial  transaction,  and does not belong  to the bodily  acts 
of worship.  This has three  points  to be made:
The first meaning  is that to utter the word of testimony  is to stick to 
monotheism,  and bear witness  to the Oneness  of the worshipped  god; and the 
stipulation  to fulfill that to the best is that the monotheist  should  have no 
beloved  other than the One and Only, since the love tolerates  no division  of 
affection;  and it is of little benefit  to express  the Oneness  of God only by the 
tongue.  It is the departure  from the beloved  which  tests the degree  of love.  To be 
sure, the wealth  is the object  of the love of the people  for it is the instrument  
therewith  they enjoy  of the delights  and pleasures  of this world,  and because  of 
which they love life and dislike  death, although  it is this which  leads to their  
meeting  with the beloved  (Allah  in the hereafter).  Thus,  they have been tested  in 
their loyalty  to their claim that they love god, and they have been asked to 
dispense  with (a portion  of) their property,  which  is the centre  of their love and 
adoration  (in this world).
For this reason,  Allah Almighty  says: "Allah  has purchased  of the Believers  
their persons  and their goods;  for theirs (in return)  is the Garden  (of Paradise)."  
(At-Tawbah  111)407
if(|5 >1 djt co! ♦ ^
This (purchase)  is through  fighting  in His Way,  which  is to sacrifice  one's  soul  
out of longing  for meeting  Allah  Almighty  (after  death).  But to sacrifice  property  
is much easier (in the sight of the people  than to sacrifice  the soul). Having  
understood  this, the people  have been  divided  into three  divisions:
the first division  of people  proved  true to their monotheism,  thereupon  they  
fulfilled  their covenant  (of faith with Allah) and sacrificed  the whole of their  
property,  from  which  they have saved  even no Dinar,  nor a Dirham,  to the extent  
that they were not in need to occupy  themselves  with how much  it was binding  
upon  them  to offer  as obligatory  charity,  to the extent  that when  one of them  was 
asked  about  the obligatory  charity  due upon  two hundred  Dirhams,  he said: "Five  
Dirhams  are ordained  by law to be paid by the laymen;  and as for us, it is 
incumbent  upon  us to give the whole  of it."
For this reason,  Abu Bakr  gave the whole  of his property  in charity,  and Umar  
gave half of his property  in charity,  and when the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace be upon him" asked Umar  about  what he had left for his 
family,  he said: "The  like of it." when  he "Peace  be upon  him" asked  Abu Bakr  he


Page 410:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
said: "I've left for them Allah and His Messenger."  On that the Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "The difference  between  
you is the same as the difference  between  your words  of reply."  Abu Bakr As- 
Siddiq (the truly faithful  believer)  fulfilled  his covenant  of truthfulness  and 
withhold  with himself  nothing  other than his beloved,  i.e. Allah and His 
Messenger.
The second  division  of people  are those whose  degree  is lesser than the 
former.  They  withhold  their property,  and watch  the seasons  of need and welfare  
(to spend  their wealth).  Their  intend,  by their saving,  to spend  only as much  as 
the need requires,  without  being  blessed  in luxury,  and expend  what is beyond  
their need on whatever  sides of good appears  to them,  in this way, they do not 
restrict  dtemselves  only to the amount  of the obligatory  charity  due upon them,  
such followers  as An-Nakh'i,  Ash-Sha'bi,  Ata' and Mujahid  were of the opinion  
diat there were other rights due upon the property  and wealth beside the 
obligatory  charity.  Ash-Sha'bi  was asked: "Is there any right other than the 
obligatory  charity  due upon  the property?"  he said: "Yes. Have  you not heard  the 
saying  of Allah  Almighty:  " to spend  of your substance,  out of love for Him, for 
your kin, for orphans,  for the needy,  for the wayfarer,  for those  who ask, and for 
the ransom  of slaves"?  (Al-Baqarah  177)
Jc—o tfjj jLi: jTj i/jiY\  JlLu jUj ?
They also sought  the evidence  for that in the statement  of Allah  Almighty:  
"and spend  out of what  We have  provided  for them"  (Al-Baqarah  3)
i j f
And: " O you who believe!  Spend  out of (the boundes)  we have provided  for 
you, before  the Day comes  when  no bargaining  (will avail),  nor friendship  nor 
intercession."  (Al-Baqarah  254)
*5 fyj o' jj ^j\lj ^
They pretended  that this was not abrogated  by the Holy Verse of the 
obligatory  charity,  and argued  that this should  belong  to the right of a Muslim  
upon a Muslim.  This means  that it is incumbent  upon a solvent,  whenever  he 
finds anyone  in need, to remove  his need, and this is something  beyond  the 
pordon  of the obligatory  charity.
What  is true in this respect  according  to jurisprudence  is to say that should  
such need trouble  anyone,  to relieve  him of it becomes  then a collecdve  (and not 
individual)  duty,  since,  in no way could  it be permissible  to throw  away  the life of 
a Muslim.  But, it might  be said that it is binding  upon  a solvent  to relieve  a needy  
one of his need by way of loan,  and it is not binding  upon  him to do so as a gift, 
seeing  that he has fulfilled  the obligatory  charity  due upon him. But it might  be408


Page 411:
Book  five: The mysteries  of obligatory  charity  
said also that it is incumbent  upon  him to give him at the time as a gift, and it is 
not permissible  for him to do so by way of loan, i.e. it is impermissible  to force  
the needy  to accept  the loan (and thus is required  to pay it back).  However,  this 
matter  is controversial,  and the loan is to come  down  to the lowest  degree  of the 
laymen,  i.e. the third  degree.
The third division  includes  those who limit themselves  only to what is 
obligatory  upon them,  with neither  reduction  from nor addition  to it; and this is 
the lowest  degree.  Almost  all the laymen  limit themselves  to that, in view  of their  
greed  and niggardliness,  and great  inclination  to wealth,  and their halfhearted  love  
for the hereafter.  Allah  Almighty  says in this respect:  "If He were to ask you for 
all of them,  and press you, you would  covetously  withhold,  and He would  bring  
out all your  ill-feeling."  (Muhammad  37)409
^ (X'. 1 oj )>
How  much  is the difference  between  a servant,  from  whom  He Almighty  has 
purchased  his own property  and soul, on the condition  that he will be admitted  to 
the Garden  (of Paradise)  in return  for that, and a servant  whom  He does not 
press in view of his niggardliness.  This is one of the meanings  given to Allah's  
command  to His servants  to give their  wealth  in charity.
The second  meaning  is to get purified  from the attribute  of niggardliness,  
which  is one of the destructives.  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace be upon him" said (according  to a certain  narration):  "Three  things  are 
from amongst  the destructives:  sordid avarice,  vehement  passion,  and self-  
conceit."  Allah  Almighty  says: "And those saved  from the covetousness  of their  
own souls,  they are the ones that achieve  prosperity."  (Al-Hashr  9)
{0} ^ • j l <3yi ^*3 ^
In the quarter  of the destructives,  there  will be a discussion  of the point  of its 
destructive  nature,  and the way of keeping  away from it. The attribute  of 
niggardliness  and covetousness  could be eliminated  by having the self 
accustomed  to give and spend out of his property,  for indeed,  the love of 
anything  would  not cease  unless  one is overpowered  to leave  it, until  it is become  
a practice.  In this meaning,  the obligatory  charity  is a purity,  in the sense that it 
purifies  the almsgiver  from the stigma of the destructive  niggardliness  and 
covetousness;  and as much  as one gives out of his property,  and as far as he is 
pleased  with his spending,  and as well as he rejoices  of spending  it in the Way of 
Allah  Almighty,  he get purified.
The third  meaning  is to give thanks  for Allah's  Grace  (upon  His servants).  
The grace  of Allah  Almighty  upon  His servant  appears  in himself  as well as in his 
property.  From  this point  of view,  the bodily  acts of worship  is to give thanks  for 
the graces  of body; and the financial  acts of worship  is to give thanks  for the 
grace of wealth.  How despicable  is the one who sees a poor man, to whom  
sustenance  has been restricted,  and he has been forced  to be in need of it, and at


Page 412:
410 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
the same time,  he (the wealthy)  does not stretch  a helping  hand to give thanks  to 
Allah Almighty  Who has made  him free from want and begging,  which  He has 
visited  upon  others,  by giving  in charity  one-fortieth  or one-tenth  of his property.
The second  duty:  it pertains  to the time of fulfillment.  It is out of the good  
manners  of the religious  men to give what is due upon  them in advance  of the 
time in which  it becomes  binding,  in order  to show  their  desire  for obedience  and 
submission  (to the commands  of Allah Almighty),  by bringing  pleasure  and 
happiness  to the hearts  of the poverty-stricken,  and to hasten  on to avoid the 
obstacles  of time which  might  obstruct  him from  doing  good,  knowing  that there  
is evil in delaying  it, with which  a servant  might  be at risk of disobedience  in case  
of deferring  it beyond  the time at which  it becomes  binding.  One should  avail  
himself  of the opportunity  when  there  appears  any motive  felt inwardly  for doing  
good,  for this belongs  to the passing  thoughts  inspired  into the heart  by the King.  
To be sure, the heart  of the believer  lies in between  two of the Fingers  of (AJlah)  
Most  Gracious,  and how quick  it turns (from  one state to another);  and Satan,  on 
the other  hand,  promises  poverty,  and commands  (his devotees)  to do what is 
shameful  and vile, through  a whispered  thought  which  follows  that of the angel.
So, let one avail himself  of this opportunity,  and fix a certain  month  to fulfill  
the whole  of his due, if he so likes, and endeavour  to choose  the best and most  
convenient  of times,  in order  that his excellence  might  rise (in the Sight  of Allah  
Almighty)  and (the reward  of) his obligatory  charity  might  be multiplied.  Let it be, 
for example,  the month  of Muharram,  which  is the first month  in the year, and it 
is one of the Sacred  months,  or the month  of Ramadan,  for the Messenger  of 
Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" was the most  generous  of all the 
people  in that month,  even more  generous  than the strong  uncontrollable  wind  
(in readiness  and haste  to do charitable  deeds),  during  which  he used to withhold  
nothing.  The month  of Ramadan  has the great  excellence  of the Night  of Power,  
on which  the Qur'an  was sent down.  Mujahid  used to say: "Say not 'Ramadan',  
for it is one of Allah's  Names,  but you may say 'the month  of Ramadan'."  The  
month  of Dhul-Hijjah  also is of great excellence,  since it is one of the Sacred  
months,  in which  their  lies the greater  pilgrimage;  and in it there  lie also the well-  
known  days,  i.e. the first ten, and the numbered  days,  i.e. the days of Tashriq.  The  
best of the days of Ramadan  are the last ten days,  whereas  the best of the days of 
Dhul-Hijjah  are the first ten days.
The third duty: it pertains  to spending  in charity  in secrecy  (and not in 
public),  since  it is farther  removed  from the desire  to be seen and heard  of men.  
In this respect,  the Messenger  of AJlah "Peace  be upon him" said: "The best  
(object  of) charity  is that given in secret, no matter  how little it might be, 
therewith  to relieve  a poverty-stricken  person."  According  to one of the learned  
men: "There  are three of the treasures  of righteousness,  one of which  is to give  
(the objects  of) charity  secretly."  According  to a certain  narration  the Propheti
:
|
:


Page 413:
Book  five: The mysteries  of obligatory  charity
"Peace  be upon  him" said: "A servant  might  do a deed in secret,  which  is written  
for him in the list of works  which  are done  secredy,  and once he demonstrates  it, 
it is moved  to be written  in the list of the works  which  are done publicly;  and if 
he talks about  it, it is taken  out in order  to be written  in the list of works  which  
are done  by way of showing  off."
According  to a well-known  narration:  "There  will be seven,  whom  Allah  
Almighty  will shade with His shade,  on the day on which  there will be no 
shade other than His...one  of whom  will be a man who gave an object  of 
charity  (in secret)  that his left hand did not know what his right had had 
given."  According  to another  tradition:  "The (object  of) charity  to be given  in 
secret extinguishes  the anger of the Lord."  Allah Almighty  says: " If you 
disclose  (acts of) charity,  even so it is well, but if you conceal  them,  and make  
them reach  those  (really)  in need,  that is best for you: it will remove  from  you 
some  of your (stains  of) evil. And Allah  is well acquainted  with what  you do."  
(Al-Baqarah  272)411
ojj Is*
The benefit  of concealing  it is to get rid of the evil of being  seen and heard  of 
men. The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said in 
this issue: "Allah  never  accepts  anything  from him who likes to be heard  or seen  
of men, nor from him who makes  reminders  of his generosity."  The one who  
talks about  his objects  of charity  seeks  to be heard  of men,  as well as the one who  
gives publicly  among  an assembly  of people  seeks to be seen of men. But it is 
only to disclose  it, and keep silent of talking  about  it that affirms  sincerity  and 
truthfulness.  Some people  endeavoured  their utmost  to conceal  the identity  of 
the almsgiver  even from the recipient,  in different  ways: one of them threw  the 
object  of his charity  into the hand of a blind man, and another  threw  it on the 
way and in the sitting  place of a poor where  he could find it, but could  not see 
the almsgiver,  one placed  it into the garment  of a poor  while  he was sleeping,  and 
one sent it to the hand of a poor through  another  one, so that he would  not 
know  the identity  of the almsgiver,  who would  ask the conveyor  not to disclose  
his personality  and recommend  him to conceal  his identity.  The purpose  of all of 
that is to seek to extinguish  the (fire of the) anger  of the Lord  Almighty,  and keep  
away  from  being  seen or heard  of men.
But if it is not possible  for an almsgiver  but to be recognized  even by only  
one person,  it is much  better  for him to hand over his object  of charity  to a 
deputy,  who, in turn, would undertake  the process  of conveying  it to the 
indigent,  who does not recognize  him, since both showing  off and reminder  of 
generosity  lie in the indigent's  knowledge  (of the almsgiver),  whereas  only  
showing  off lies in his knowledge  of the identity  of the mediator.  Whenever  the


Page 414:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
almsgiver's  purpose  is to obtain  fame,  his good deed will be fruitless  since the 
purpose  of the obligatory  charity  is to eliminate  niggardliness  and weaken  the love of 
wealth;  but even the love of position  and rank is more  dangerous  than the love  
of wealth,  and both will be destructive  in the hereafter,  as well as the attribute  
of niggardliness  turns to be, so to speak,  in the grave a stinging  scorpion,  the 
desire to be seen of men turns to be a biting viper. However,  man is 
commanded  to weaken  or destroy  them  in order to avoid or at least diminish  
their harm. But when he seeks to be seen and heard of men, he seems to 
strengthen  the viper and weaken  the scorpion.  As much as he weakens  the 
scorpion,  he strengthens  the viper.  Had he left them  as they were,  it would  have  
been easier for him (to get rid of their harm). For the strength  of these  
attributes  lies in doing  according  to what they requires,  and their weakness  lies 
in doing in opposition  and contradiction  to them as well as in doing in 
opposition  to what they require.  Which  benefit  then lies in contradicting  the 
requirements  of niggardliness  and responding  to the desire of being seen of 
men thereby  weakening  the weaker  of both and strengthening  the stronger?  
The mysteries  of these concepts  will be discussed  later in the Quarter  on the 
Destructives.
The fourth  duty: let him demonstrate  his charity  in so far as he knows  this 
will exhort  the people  to emulate  him. But at the same time, let him safeguard  
himself  from being  seen of men, in the very manner  we will discuss  later in the 
Book on Showing  Off. Allah Almighty  says: “If you disclose  (acts of) charity,  
even so it is well."  (Al-Baqarah  271)412
<£ JyA IjJLp oj
This should  be subject  to the requirement  of the situation  to disclose  it: either  
to exhort  the people  to emulate  the almsgiver,  or because  the beggar  does his 
begging  at the presence  of an assembly  of people,  whereupon  giving  in charity  
should  not be left just for fear of showing  off by giving  it in public.  Nay! One  
should  give in charity  and safeguard  himself  from being  seen of men as possible  
as it could  be.
That's  because  there  is a third  evil thing  in giving  in charity  in publicly,  against  
which  one should  safeguard  himself,  beside  both of reminders  of generosity  and 
showing  off, i.e. to bring shame  on the poor because  of his poverty,  whose  
feeling  might  be injured  by being  seen in the form of a needy  one. But even,  since  
it is he, who disgraces  himself  when  he begs others  publicly,  there  is no danger  of 
injuring  his feelings  in giving  him charity  in public.  This is like the exposure  of 
the dissoluteness  of a man who has concealed  it. Such an exposure  is forbidden,  
as well as it is forbidden  to spy on it, and be accustomed  to talk about  it in public  
in his absence.  But the punishment  of him who divulges  his dissoluteness  should  
be to spread  it among  the people,  despite  the fact that he is the main  cause  of it.
This is the same meaning  expressed  by the statement  of the Messenger  of


Page 415:
Book  five: The mysteries  of obligatory  charity  
Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him": "He, who takes off the dress of 
shyness,  no protection  should be observed  against backbiting  him." AJlah  
Almighty  says in this issue: "And  spend  out of what  We have provided  you with  
in secrecy  and in public."  (Ar-Ra'd  22)413
With that He Almighty  prompts  the people  to spend  in charity  publicly,  in 
view of its advantage  of exhorting  others  to do the same.  For this reason,  let the 
servant  be subtle  in his consideration  of weighing  this advantage  with that danger  
inherent  therein,  which  differs  according  to the different  states and persons.  In 
some cases, it might be better to make the giving  in charity  public  for many  
people;  and to be sure, if one becomes  well-acquainted  with both benefits  and 
disadvantages,  and is free from the worldly  desires,  what  is more  convenient  and 
relevant  to each state  will be clear  to him.
The fifth duty: let not the almsgiver  corrupt  his giving in charity  with  
reminders  of generosity,  and causing  harm (to those whom he gives). Allah  
Almighty  says in this respect:  " O you who believe!  Cancel  not your charity  by 
reminders  of your  generosity  or by injury,  like those  who spend  their substance  to 
be seen of men."  (Al-Baqarah  264)
4 «£SJ -,a1C jj& L J-y£> i jJJalj y \j1a\1 ^
They differ about the reality of the distinction  between  reminding  of 
generosity  and causing  injury  therewith:  It was said: "To make reminders  of 
generosity  is to make a mention  of the gift (before  the people),  whereas  to 
cause injury therewith  is to make it publicly."  According  to Sufyan:  "He,  
whose charity was rendered  fruitless  had made reminders  of his gifts,  
thereupon  it was said to him: "What is to make reminders  of one's  
generosity?"  he said: "It is to make  a mention  of it, and talk about  it (publicly  
before  the people)."
It was also said that to make  reminders  of generosity  is to make  use of him in 
service  in return for giving,  whereas  causing  injury  therewith  is to put him to 
shame because  of his poverty.  It was also said that to make reminders  of 
generosity  is to behave  arrogantly  towards  him because  of his gifts which  he gives  
to him, whereas  to injure  him therewith  is to repulse  him, and rebuke  him for his 
begging.  The Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him" said: "Verily,  Allah  
Almighty  never  accepts  the object  of charity  given  by him who makes  reminders  
of his generosity."
In my sight, reminder  of one's generosity  has a root and a place where  it is 
fixed (in the heart);  and it is one of the states  and attributes  of the heart,  from  
which  there  spring  states  which  appear  themselves  in speech  as well as in the acts 
of organs.  Its root lies in seeing  himself  benefactor  and Bestower  of favours  upon  
the poor,  although  it is incumbent  upon  him to see himself  beneficiary  and owing


Page 416:
414 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
to the poverty-stricken,  who concedes  to accept  from him the due of Allah  
Almighty  which  is the cause of his purification  and salvation  from the fire (of 
Hell);  and were he not to accept  it, he would  remain  in pledge  of it. so, he should  
then appreciate  for the poverty-stricken  his favour  upon  him, when  he makes  his 
hand act on behalf  of (that of) Allah Almighty  to receive  the due of Allah  
Almighty.  The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said:  
"Verily,  the (object  of) charity  falls into the Hand  of Allah before  it reaches  the 
hand  of the beggar."
Thus,  let the almsgiver  be assured  that he hands  over to Allah His due, and 
that the poverty-stricken  takes from Allah Almighty  his sustenance  (doomed  to 
him) after it has been given  to Allah first. If one is in debt to another,  which  he 
transfers  to his slave  or servant  who are dependent  upon  him in their sustenance  
to pay, it would  be out of impudence  and ignorance  from  the part of the payer  to 
think that the recipient  is under  any obligation  to him, since his benefactor  is 
him,  who  is responsible  for his sustenance,  whereas  he only has fulfilled  what  was 
required  from  him by his master,  which  enabled  him to obtain  his favour,  thereby  
helping  himself,  without  putting  anyone  under  any obligation  to him.
Were he to be well-aware  of all or at least one of the three meanings  of 
understanding  the significance  of the obligation  of Zakat  as we have discussed,  
he would  not see himself  as a benefactor  but to himself,  either  through  giving  his 
property  in order  to show  his love for Allah  Almighty,  or to purify  himself  from  
the evil of niggardliness,  or through  giving thanks for the grace of wealth  
(bestowed  upon  him by Allah  Almighty)  in the hope  of getting  more.
Whatever  it might  be, there are no dealings  between  him and the poverty-  
stricken  until he regards  himself  as the benefactor.  Once  he sees himself  as the 
benefactor  to him, this leads to the manifestation  of the outward  signs of 
reminders  of generosity  which  we have already  discussed,  i.e. talking  about  ones  
gifts and insistence  on making  them  public,  seeking  reward  from the beneficiary  
by expecting  from him thanks,  praise,  service,  respect,  and veneration,  and by 
requiring  him to carry  out everyday  jobs for him, adoring  him in assemblies,  and 
agree with him on all subjects.  AH these are the fruits of the reminders  of 
generosity.  As for the inward  meaning  of reminders  of generosity  we have  already  
mentioned  them  earlier.
As for causing  harm  with injury  (of the feeling  of the beneficiary),  its external  
signs are rebuke,  disrespect,  harsh speech,  stern looks, putting  to shame  by 
exposure,  and all ways of derision.  Its internal  nature  from which  its external  
signs stem consist  of two things  : the one is man's  dislike  to give up any of his 
wealth  and the difficulty  to which  he is put when  he leave  any of it. This causes  
to be inevitably  bad-tempered.  The second  is his belief  that he is superior  to one
the poor  who, because  of his need,  is inferior.  Both these  things  are the result  of 
ignorance.  For he who dislikes  to expend  one dirham  for a thousand  (which  he 
will receive  as reward  in the hereafter)  is really  foolish.  It is well-known  that one


Page 417:
Book  five: The mysteries  of obligatory  charity  
expends  his wealth  in order  to obtain  Allah's  Good  Pleasure,  and to enjoy  His 
rewards  in the hereafter.  The wealth  which  he expends  for this purpose  is more  
honoured  than that which  he had spent  or may spend  to purify  himself  from  the 
stigma  of niggardliness  or to give thanks  in the hope  of receiving  more.  Whatever  
you might  assume,  there  is no justification  for man's  dislike  (to give up any of his 
wealth).
As for the second  meaning,  it is also out of ignorance,  for were one to know  
which  excellence  a poor  has over a wealthy  on the one hand,  and how dangerous  
are the rich and wealthy  people  in this world on the other hand, no wealthy  
would  ever disdain  a poor: on the contrary,  he would  seek his blessing  and wish  
to be in his rank. Of a surety,  the righteous  among  the rich and wealthy  people  
will enter the Garden  five hundred  years after the poor and indigent.  For this 
reason,  the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  him" said: "“By the Lord of the 
Ka'bah!  They are the losers. ” Abu Dharr  asked him: “O Messenger  of Allah!  
Who are those (losers)? ” He said: “They are those,  who have a great wealth  
except  so and so and so (i.e. those  who spend  their wealth  on whomever  they  
find) in front of them,  behind  them,  on their right and on their left; and how a 
few they are!...to  the end of the narration.
Furthermore,  how should  a wealthy  one disdain  a poverty  stricken,  whorr  
Allah  Almighty  has made the source  of his profit,  since through  the labours  c 
the poverty-  stricken  he earns and accumulates  his wealth,  and saves of it ai 
much  as is required  by his need?  He has been commanded  to give the poverty-  
stricken  as much as is proportional  to his need and to withhold  from him any 
surplus  which  will cause  harm  to him if it were  given  to him. The wealthy  then is 
employed  to provide  the poverty-stricken  with sustenance  but he differs  from  
him by his endeavour  to setde disputes  and hold responsibilities,  and his 
stewardship  over the surplus  (of his property)  until he dies, so that his enemies  
would  devour  what  he has left. Thus,  whenever  man's  dislike  to leave any of his 
wealth  is replaced  by gladness  and joy for the aid given  to him by Allah  to fulfill  
what  is due upon  him and hand  it over to the poverty-stricken,  so that the poor,  
by accepting  it, might  free him from obligation,  injury  and its [external  signs of] 
rebuke  and stern  looks  will vanish  and give room  to joy and thanks,  in addition  to 
the acceptance  of the obligation.  This is the source of both reminders  of 
generosity  and injury.
But, you might  say: "To see oneself  in the position  of a benefactor  is an 
abstruse  thing:  is there  any sign therewith  to examine  his heard,  and know  that he 
has not seen himself  in such a position  of the benefactor?"
It should  be known  to you then that this has a fine and clear sign: let him 
suppose  that if a poor  person,  for example,  committed  a sin against  him, or aided  
an enemy  in conspiracy  against  him, would  then his disapproval  of him and 
rejection  of his behaviour  after giving  him in charity  be stronger  than his before  
giving  him in charity?  If his disapproval  of the poor  who committed  sin against415


Page 418:
416 The quarter  of the acts of worship
him after giving  him charity  was stronger  (than  it would  have been before  giving  
charity  to him),  then his charity  had not been free from the taint of reminders  of 
generosity,  for he expected,  because  of it, what  he had expected  not before  it.
Therefore,  you might  say: "This matter  is obscure,  and the heart of anyone  
could  hardly  be free from  that: what  then is its remedy?"
It should  be known  to you that it has internal  as well as external  remedy.  Its 
internal  remedy  is to have knowledge  of the (three)  facts which  we've  mentioned  
earlier  in connection  with understanding  the obligation  (of the regular  charity),  
and the fact that it is the poverty-stricken  who is benefactor  to him, by help him 
get purified,  through  his accepting  the objects  of charity.
As for the external  remedy,  it implies  the good deeds  done by the one under  
obligation,  since the deeds  which  result  from the good  manners  colour  the heart  
with the good  manners,  as we shall  see its mysteries  later  in the last portion  of the 
book.  For this reason,  one of those (righteous  men) used to place the object  of 
charity  in front  of a poor  person,  and stand  before  him, begging  him to accept  it, 
in such a way as to make  him seem  in the form  of a beggar,  and to experience  the 
unpleasant  feeling  of fear lest he might  be refused.  One of them also used to 
stretch  his hand (with the object  of charity)  towards  the poor one, so that he 
would  take it from his hand, in order  that the hand of the poor would  be the 
higher.
It was the habit of both A'ishah  and Umm  Salamah  "Allah  be pleased  with  
them"  to say to the courier,  whenever  they sent an object  of charity  to a poor  
man: "Retain  in memory  the invocation  therewith  he supplicates  (for us)." Then  
they would  repeat  the like of his supplication  saying:  "Let this (our saying)  be in 
return  for that (his saying)  so that our object  of charity  would  be given  with sheer  
sincerity."  That's because  they expected  not even the invocation,  seeing it 
something  similar  to the reward  (of their charity),  and thus they countered  it with  
its like. As such did Umar Ibn Al-Khattab,  and his son Abdullah  "Allah  be 
pleased  with both".
This is the way the physicians  of the heart  treated  their hearts,  and there  is 
no external  remedy  other  than those deed indicative  of submission,  humility  
and acceptance  of obligation;  while  their internal  remedy  is in the knowledge  
of the facts which we have already  mentioned.  The one is from the 
perspective  of work and the other from that of knowledge.  On the other  
hand, the heart could hardly  be treated  except  by the mixture  of knowledge  
and work; and this condition  in almsgiving  corresponds  to submission  in 
prayer.  This is proved  by the statement  of the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be 
upon  him":  "Man  gains  nothing  from his prayer  except  such of it as he grasps  
well." This is similar  to his another  statement:  "Allah never accepts  the 
(objects  of) charity  of him who makes reminders  of his generosity."  It is 
similar  to the Allah's  statement:  "Cancel  not your alms by reminders  of your  
generosity  or by injury."  (Al-Baqarah  264)


Page 419:
Book  five: The mysteries  of obligatory  charity --------------------
^ CS^[ 3 Ijllal*1 V jjl L^JllJ
The verdict  of the jurisprudent  that the charity  is fulfilled  regardless  of that 
condition  (of knowledge  and work  in accordance  with that knowledge)  and that,  
once  given,  the person  frees himself  from the obligation  is a different  matter,  and 
to its concept  we have referred  in the Book  of Prayer.
The sixth  duty:  let the almsgiver  belittle  his gift (whatever  significant  it might  
be), for indeed,  if he makes  much  of it, he will be swollen  with pride  because  of 
it, and to be sure, the vanity  is one of the destructives,  and it always  deprives  the 
deeds of their fruits. Allah Almighty  says in this respect:  " and on the day of 
Hunain:  behold!  your great numbers  elated you, but they availed  you naught."  
(At-Tawbah  25)
^ 3J poi fjjj 4 ^ ill £
It is said that the more a good deed is belitded  in the sight of its doer, the 
greater  it becomes  in the Sight of Allah Almighty,  whereas  the greater  a sin is 
regarded  by its doer, the trivial  it becomes  in the Sight of Allah Almighty.  It is 
also said: "In no way could a favour  be completed  but with the help of three  
things:  to belittle  it, to hasten  on to do it, and to conceal  it (in avoidance  of being  
seen of men)."
Furthermore,  making  much of a thing is different  from reminding  of one's  
generosity  and causing  injury  therewith.  If one, for instance,  spends  his property  
to construct  a mosque,  or build  an outpost  (to safeguard  the borders  of the state),  
he could  make much  of his gift, but in no way could  he make reminders  of his 
generosity,  or injure  anyone  with that. However,  both  vanity  and making  much  of 
deeds affect  almost  all the acts of worship,  and their remedy  is through  both  
knowledge  and work.
As for knowledge,  one should  be well-aware  of the fact that one-tenth,  or one-  
fortieth  (his property)  is a little portion  of the great amount,  (and if he restricts  
his charity  to that portion)  he then has been satisfied  by the lowest  rank of giving,  
as we have mentioned  in the understanding  of the obligatory  nature  of Zakat.  
Thus,  he is more fitting  to feel shy of it: how then should  he make much  of it? 
nevertheless,  if he rises up to the highest  degree  of giving  , and spends  the whole,  
or the most  portion  of his property  (in charity),  let him then wonder  from  where  
has he got this wealth,  and how he should  spend  it. of a surety,  the wealth  (as 
anything  in the world)  belongs  to Allah,  to Whom  he is under  obligation,  when  
He has given him the wealth,  and helped  him spend  it (in charity).  So, it is not 
consonant  with him to make much of a thing  which  in itself  belongs  to Allah  
Almighty?  If he is in the station  which  requires  him to look at the hereafter,  with  
the view that he spends  (in charity)  just in expectation  of the reward,  it is not417
a -


Page 420:
418 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
fitting  for him to make  much  of spending  that the reward  of which  he will receive  
is so many  times  like it.
As for work,  it is that he should  give him the giving  of a shy man who proves  
niggardly  when  he withholds  the remaining  portion  of his property  from Allah  
Almighty.  Thus,  he should  appear  in the state of a submissive  meek  person,  like 
the state of him who  is required  to give back a trust,  and he gives  some  and keeps  
some with him. That's  because  the whole  property  belongs  to Allah Almighty,  
and to give it all is the dearest  in Allah's  Sight. But He Almighty  has not 
commanded  His servant  to do so, for it is much  difficult  upon  him, because  of 
his niggardliness,  as Allah  Almighty  says: " If He were to ask you for all of them,  
and press you, you would  covetously  withhold,  and He would  bring  out all your  
ill-feeling."  (Muhammad  37)
The seventh  duty: let the almsgiver  choose  from his property  the best and 
the dearest  to him, the most  honoured  and the most  lawful,  for Allah  Almighty  is 
good,  and He never  accepts  but what  is lawful  and good.  If what  is given  as aims  
is taken  out of that whose  sources  and possession  are suspicious,  it fails to fulfill  
the required  conditions.  According  to the narration  of Iban on the authority  of 
Anas  Ibn Malik:  "Blessed  be a servant  who spends  (in charity)  out of his property  
which  he has earned  with committing  no sin thereof!"  it is out of bad manners  
not to take out as alms the best of the property,  for one might  keep the best for 
himself,  his servant,  or his family,  thereby  giving  preference  to others  over Allah  
Almighty.  If one does the same  with his guest,  and offers  to him the worst  kind  
of food  he has in the house,  he will provoke  his hatred.
This should  be the state of him who observes  Allah  Almighty  (in all of his 
deeds).  Moreover,  if he observes  himself,  and the reward  which  is awaiting  him in 
the hereafter,  not wise then is he, who gives others  preference  over himself,  
seeing  that one has nothing  from his own property  beyond  what he gives in 
charity  and saves (for himself  in the hereafter),  or what he devours,  and 
consumes.  However,  what  he devours  is just to fulfill  his immediate  desires  at the 
time. It is then not wise to restrict  one's attention  to the immediate  desires,  and 
leave  the (future  which  is secured  through)  saving,  since  Allah  Almighty  says: "O 
you who believe!  Give of the good things  which  you have (honourably)  earned,  
and of the fruits  of the earth  which  We have produced  for you, and do not even  
aim at getting  anything  which  is bad, in order  that out of it you may give away  
something,  when you yourselves  would  not receive  it except  with closed  eyes.  
And know  that Allah  is free of all wants,  and worthy  of all praise."  (Al-Baqarah  
267)
IjJLAjl  QiUjI ^
$ •* ) ' * 4 i ^ • ) • t f — £ / f ' , l * J ** <


Page 421:
Book  five: The mysteries  of obligatory  charity
He means  that you never  accept  it but with dislike  and shyness,  and this is the 
concept  of receiving  with closed  eyes. So, do not favour  your Lord with that 
(which  is not good).
According  to a certain  narration:  "A single Dirham  (to be spent  in charity)  
might  be given precedence  over one hundred  thousand  Dirhams  (in reward)."  
That's because  it might be spent out of the best and most lawful of one's  
property,  which  he gives  with good  pleasure  and happiness  of giving  (in charity),  
whereas  one hundred  thousand  Dirhams  might  be taken  out of what  one dislikes  
most of his property,  which  indicates  that he does not favour  Allah Almighty  
with what he likes. Allah Almighty  criticizes  a people  who specify  to Allah just 
what they dislike,  when He says: "They  attribute  to Allah what they hate (for 
themselves).  And their tongues  assert  the falsehood  that all good things  are for 
themselves:  without  doubt  for them is the Fire, and they will be the first to be 
hastened  on into it!" (An-Nahl  62)
4 © fr-'j
I.e. the fire will be the reprisal  for their  specifying  to Allah  Almighty  what  th< 
dislike.  1
The eighth  duty: let the almsgiver  seek for him who is the worthiest  of hid 
object  of charity,  and not be satisfied  with the recipient's  being  only one of the 
eight  groups  of beneficiaries.  There  are particular  characteristics  which  should  be 
observed  in them,  and they are six:
The first is that he should  seek for the righteous  pious,  who turn their  back to 
(the pleasures  and delights  of) this world,  and devote  themselves  wholeheartedly  
to the transaction  of the hereafter.  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace be upon him" said in this respect:  "Eat not but the food of a righteous  
pious  man,  and let none  but a righteous  pious  man eat your food."  That's  because  
the righteous  pious seeks the aid of it (your food) to support  his piety, and by 
your helping  him, you will be his partner  in his good  deeds.  He "Peace  be upon  
him" said also: "Give  your food to the righteous  pious,  and bestow  your favours  
upon  the faithful  believers."  According  to another  narration:  "Entertain  with  your  
food such as you love in (the religion  of) Allah  Almighty."
One of the learned  men used to favour  with his food the poverty-stricken  
among  the Sufis.  It was said to him: "It'd be better  if you include  all the kinds  of 
poor in your food!"  he said: "No! those (poor Sufis) have devoted  themselves  
wholeheartedly  to Allah Almighty,  and when anyone  of them is afflicted  with  
poverty,  his attention  would  soon be diverted;  and thus, it is much  better  to me 
to bring  back even a single  one of them to devote  himself  once again to Allah  
Almighty  than to give one thousand  of those whom  the affairs  of this world  
concern."  This was mentioned  to Al-Junaid  he made good of it and said419
*


Page 422:
420 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
describing  him: "This  is one of the devotees  of Allah  Almighty."  He further  said:  
"I've never  heard  a speech  much  better  than that for a long time."  It was related  
that this same man came upon hard times and decided  to close the shop  
Thereupon  Al-Junaid  sent him some  money  and said: "Make  this your  capital  and 
do not close down  your shop: verily  the trade cause no harm to men like you."  
This man was a grocer  who charged  the poor nothing  for the foodstuff  which  
they purchased  from  him.
The second  of those  characteristics  is that the beneficiary  should  belong  to 
the men of knowledge,  for this object of charity helps him increase  his 
knowledge;  and of a surety,  the knowledge  of from amongst  the most honoured  
acts and deeds  of worships,  when  the intention  therein  is true. It is narrated  that 
Ibn Al-Mubarak  used to assign  his favours  only to those of knowledge.  It was 
said to him: "Would  that you included  others  in your favours!"  on that he said: "I 
do not know, after Prophethood,  a rank far better than that of the men of 
knowledge."  That's  because  if anyone  of them  diverts  his attention  to his need,  he 
will not be devoted  to knowledge,  nor will he be eager to learning.  For this 
reason,  it is better  to spare  time for them  in order  to help them  apply  themselves  
exclusively  to knowledge  and learning.
The third  characteristic  is that the beneficiary  should  be true to his piety and 
knowledge  of monotheism.  The sign of his faith in the Oneness  of Allah  is to 
praise  and thank  Allah and to acknowledge  that He is the source  of his grace  
making  no attempt  to ascribe  it to another.  This is the state of him who is the 
most  thankful  to Allah,  he acknowledges  that Allah  Almighty  is the source  of all 
graces.  Luqman  said in his testament  to his son: "Hold  no mediator  between  
yourself  and your Lord,  the real Benefactor  and regard  all other  benefactors  as 
instruments  (in His Hand)  who are forced  to execute  His will." He who gives  
thanks  to anyone  other  than Allah  Almighty  does not know  the real Benefactor  
and does not understand  that the intermediary  instrument  (of benefaction)  is 
compelled  and submissive  to the will of Allah Almighty  Who has subdued  (the 
intermediary  instruments)  to the motives  of action  and has made  easy the ways  
(of executing  it). Consequently,  the almsgiver  gives his gift under  compulsion,  to 
the extent  that by no means  could  he be able to refrain  from that even if he so 
likes, since Allah Almighty  has implanted  in his heart that his interest  in both  
religion  and world  depends  upon  giving.
When  the impulse  (of  giving)  becomes  strong  it enjoins  a resolute  willpower  
which  gives rise to immediate  action,  with which  a person  will be unable  to resist  
or contradict  a strong  impulse  in which,  there is no room for indecision  or 
hesitation.  That's  because  it is Allah  Almighty  Who creates  impulses  and arouses  
them to action.  It is He who remedies  their points  of weakness  and eradicates  
their indecision.  He it is Who imposes  upon men the task of rising to action  
according  to their  impulses.  Such  as realizes  this fact pays no attention  but to the 
Cause  of causes.  The significance  of such a realization  is more significant  to the


Page 423:
Book  five: The mysteries  of obligatory  charity
almsgiver  than all the praise  and thanks  he may receive,  which  are nothing  but 
useless  chatter  for the most  part.
Thus,  the opportunity  to help a believing  worshipper  should  not be lost. But 
he who gives thanks  when he receives  a gift and invokes  good upon the giver,  
will criticize  when it is withheld  from him and will invoke  evil whenever  he 
despairs  of receiving  a gift. Such  persons  differ  in their  states  (of reactions).
In this respect,  it is narrated  that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon him" sent a gift to a poor man, and told the courier  to retain  in 
memory  what  he (the recipient)  would  say. When  he (the poor)  received  the gift 
he said: "Praise  be to AJlah Who never forgets  such as remembers  Him, nor 
wastes  such as gives thanks  to Him."  Then  he resumed  (by way of supplication):  
"O Allah! you have never forgotten  so and so, (in reference  to himself),  so, 
please,  make so and so (i.e. himself)  persist  in celebrating  You." When the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" was informed  of 
that he grew  pleased  and said: "I knew  that he would  say so." Consider  then how  
he had devoted  his attention  to Allah  Alone.
Once  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" asked  
a man to repent  he said: "I turn to Allah,  and not to Muhammad,  in repentance."  
On that he said: "No doubt,  he has attributed  the right to its real owners."  When  
A'ishah's  innocence  was revealed  (in the Qur'an)  in connection  with the story of 
the untrue  false speech  (faked  about her), Abu Bakr (her father) said to her: 
"Stand  and kiss the head of the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon him"!"  she 
said: "By Allah!  I never  do, and I praise  none but Allah  Almighty."  On that the 
Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" said: "Let her O Abu Bakr!"  she "Allah  
be pleased  with her" said according  to another  version:  "Praise  be to Allah  Alone,  
and not to you, nor to your companion  (the Prophet)."  However,  the Messenger  
of Allah  did not deny  that statement  from her, despite  the fact that the revelation  
(which  held her blameless)  reached  her through  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him".
It is the characteristics  of the infidels  and unbelievers  to see that things  come  
from sources  other than Allah Almighty,  in accordance  with the statement  of 
Allah  Almighty  which  carries  such description:  " When  Allah  the One and Only,  
is mentioned,  the hearts  of those  who believe  not in the Hereafter  are filled  with  
disgust  and horror;  but when (gods)  other  than He are mentioned,  behold  they  
are filled  with joy!" (Az-Zumar  45)
i O b&t&i  ^ I5j &
Such  as then does not purify  his inward  soul from seeing  the intermediaries  
except  as instruments  (in the hand of Allah Almighty)  is not free from the 
hidden  sin of ascribing  partners  to Allah (in worship).  Let him then fear Allah  
and purify  his faith from the defects  and blemishes  of ascribing  partners  to 
Allah.421


Page 424:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
The fourth  characteristic  is that the beneficiary  should  be unknown,  and 
belong  to those  who conceal  their states  (of poverty)  and hide their need (from  
the people),  and not to those given much to complaint  and grumble  (of the 
hard times).  He also should  belong  to those of magnanimity  who has lost his 
wealth  but still keeps his magnanimous  qualities  and maintains  his poise and 
self-restraint,  in accordance  with the statement  of Allah  Almighty:  "the ignorant  
man thinks,  because  of their modesty,  that they are free from want. You shall  
know  them  by their (unfailing)  mark: they beg not importunately  from all and 
sundry,  and whatever  of good you give, be assured  Allah knows  it well." (Al- 
Baqarah  273)422
4 ^ ^ _A>- O? !^5  LsL>Jj
However,  they beg not importunately  because  they are independent  and rich 
in their certainty  of faith, while exalted  in power  and honour  with their firm  
perseverance.  This kind of men should  be sought  through  searching  for the 
religious  men in each town and region,  and discovering  the internal  states of 
those  of good  and self-restraint.  To be sure, the reward  received  from  giving  gifts  
to them is many times that received  from giving  those who beg publicly  and 
openly.
The fifth characteristic  is that the beneficiary  should  be of those who have  
dependents  (to look after and spend on), or of those disabled  by sickness  or 
because  of anything  else, in order to correspond  to the statement  of Allah  
Almighty:  "(Charity  is) for those in need, who, in Allah ’s cause are restricted  
(from  travel),  and cannot  move  about  in the land, seeking  (for trade or work)."  
(Al-Baqarah  273)
^ dp w ^ <4 t ^
I.e. they are restrained  in the way to the hereafter  by responsibility  for 
dependents,  hard living,  or setting  right  the heart;  and they could  not move  about  
through  the land because  their wings are cut off, and their limbs are bound  in 
fetters.  For this reason,  Umar (Ibn Al-Khattab)  used to give the household  a 
flock of ten and more sheep;  and the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him"  himself  used to give the gifts according  to the number  of the 
members  of the family.  When  Umar "Allah be pleased  with him" was asked  
about  the greatest  distress  he said: "It is to have more dependents,  with little  
wealth."
The sixth characteristic  is that the beneficiary  should  be (preferably)  from the 
relatives  and kinship,  so that the object  of charity  would  act as charity  on the one 
hand, and a means  to keep good relation  with one's kith and kin on the other  
hand;  and of a surety,  the reward  of keeping  good relations  with one's kith and 
kin is beyond  calculation.  Ali "Allah  be pleased  with him" said: "To keep good  
relation  with one of my brothers  by (giving  him) a single  Dirham  is much  dearer


Page 425:
Book  five: The mysteries  of obligatory  charity  
to me than to give in charity  twenty  Dirhams;  and to keep good  relation  with him 
by (giving  him) twenty  Dirhams  is much  dearer  to me than to give in charity  one 
hundred  Dirhams;  and to keep good relation  with him by (giving  him)  
hundred  Dirhams  is much  dearer  to me than to emancipate  a slave (as a kind of 
charity)."  Furthermore,  just as relatives  are given precedence  over non-relatives,  
let friends  and the brethren  of good  be given  precedence  over  acquaintances.
Those  niceties  and details  should  be observed  (in giving  in charity).  Those  
the required  qualities,  and each has many  degrees,  the highest  of which  should  be 
sought by the almsgiver.  If he finds such as combines  many of those  
characteristics  and qualities,  this will be, to be sure, the great  ammunition  and the 
enormous  treasure.  If he does his best (in his seeking)  and succeeds  in his effort,  
he will have  a double  reward,  and if he fails he will have  a single  reward.
One of his double  reward  is, at the time,  the purification  of his own soul from  
the attribute  of niggardliness,  the affirmation  of the love of Allah  Almighty  in his 
heart,  and striving  his utmost  in Hid obedience;  and it is those qualities  which,  
when  strengthened  in his heart,  inflame  his longing  for meeting  Allah  Almighty.
The second  reward  is the benefit  which  he reaps from the invocations  and 
wishes  of the recipient,  for the hearts  of the righteous  exert  an immediate  and an 
ultimate  influence.  If he succeeds  (to assure these characteristics),  the double  
reward  will be obtained;  and if he fails, only the first reward  will be his portion.  In 
this way, the reward  of him who succeeds  in his effort  is doubled,  both in this 
case as well  in the other  cases.423
one
are
CHAPTER  THREE:  ON THE RECIPIENT:  THE CAUSES  OF HIS CLAIM,  
AND  THE  DUTIES  OF HIS RECEIVING
The Causes  Of Claim
It should  be known  that such as has claim  to receive  the objects  of obligatory  
charity  should  be a free Muslim,  belonging  neither  to the offspring  of Hashim,  
nor those  of Abd  Al-Muttalib,  corresponding  to at least  one of those  eight  groups  
which  are mentioned  in the Book  of Allah  Almighty.  In this way, no obligatory  
charity  should  be given to an infidel,  nor a slave, nor one belonging  to the 
offspring  of Hashim  or Abd Al-Muttalib.  But it is permissible  to give it to both a 
child and a mad, on the condition  that their guardian  should  receive  it on their  
behalf.  Now,  let's discuss  the qualities  of the eight  groups  in detail:
The first group  corresponds  to the poor. The poor is him, who has no 
property  (therewith  he might  be independent),  nor does he has power  to gain his 
But if he has got his daily  sustenance  and immediate  clothes,  he is not 
a poor,  but an indigent;  and if he has got half his daily sustenance,  he is then a 
poor;  and if he has got a shirt,  but not a towel,  footwears,  leather  socks,  trousers,  
and the shirt  which  he has is lesser  in value  to enable  him to secure  all those  as it 
befits  the poor men, he then is a poor,  because  at the time he is lacking  of what  
he needs,  and has no power  to get it. it is inordinate  to stipulate  for a poor tosustenance.


Page 426:
424 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
have no garment  beyond  what covers  his private  parts, since on the whole,  the 
like of that could  hardly  be found.  His being  accustomed  to begging  should  not 
also exclude  him from being  a poor, for in no way could  begging  be a means  of 
earning,  unlike  the case in which  he has power  to earn his living,  and it is this 
which  excludes  him from  being  a poor.
If he has power  to earn his living  through  an instrument  (which  he does not 
possess),  he is a poor until this instrument  is purchased  for him. If he is able to 
earn his living  in such a way as is not fitting  for his honour  or his station,  then he 
would  be a poor.  If he is a student  of jurisprudence  or law and his work  in order  
to earn his living  would  prevent  him from continuing  his studies  then he would  
be regarded  a poor and his ability to secure  a living will not be taken into 
consideration.  If he is a devotee  and his work to secure  a living  would  prevent  
him from fulfilling  the act of worship  and observing  the regular  division,  let him 
work  for earning  his sustenance  as much  as possible  because  his work  to earn a 
living  is more  important.
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "To 
seek an honest  living  is an obligation  ranking  second  only to a religious  ordinance  
(in significance)."  Umar  said: "To earn a living  even in a doubtful  way is better  
than to be involved  in begging."  If he is satisfied  with the spending  of his father  
on him, or of such  as to whom  he is dependent,  he should  not be considered  as a 
poor  man for this is easier  than earning.
The second  group  corresponds  to the indigent  needy;  and the indigent  is 
him, who has not what suffices  his spendings.  One might  have one thousand  
Dirhams,  even though  he is an indigent,  whereas  one might  have no more than  
an ax and a rope,  even though  he is independent.  Furthermore,  the little dwelling  
in which  he lives,  and the garment  which  covers  his body  in accordance  with his 
position  and status do not deprive  him of the name and description  of the 
indigent.  The same is true of the furniture  of his little dwelling.  In other  words  
nothing  which  he needs  and possesses  in accordance  with his status  would  affect  
(his position  as an indigent).
Similarly,  the books  of jurisprudence  which  he may possess  do not make  him 
rich, because  he is in need of them.  If he should  possess  nothing  but these  books  
he is under  no obligation  to pay the obligatory  charity  due upon  breaking  the fast of 
Ramadan.  The rule which  governs  the possession  of books  is the same as that 
which  governs  the possession  of garments  and home furniture,  for a man is in 
need of all. yet, he should  be careful  of the real need which  the book  fulfils.  The  
book is needed  for three purposes  : for instruction,  for benefiting  himself,  and 
for recreation  through  reading.  But the need of recreation  should  not have the 
same consideration  and it involves  the collection  of books of poetry  and the 
history  and stories,  and the like of those,  which  is of no benefit  for the hereafter,  
and its aim in this world  is limited  to the recreation  and amusement,  and thus  
they might  be sold in fulfillment  expiations  and the obligatory  charity  of breaking


Page 427:
Book  five: The mysteries  of obligatory  charity
the fast (of Ramadan);  and they, therefore,  deprive  one of the name and 
descripdon  of the indigent.
As for the need of instruction,  if it is for the purpose  of earning  one's living,  
such as the educator  or the tutor  who practices  his work  for charge,  those  books  
then act as his instrument,  which  should  not be sold, for the payment  of the 
obligatory  charity  of breaking  the fast, like the tools of the tailor and the other  
craftsmen.  If he undertakes  the instruction  in order to fulfill a collective  duty,  
those  books  also should  not be sold, and by no means  would  they deprive  him of 
the name  of indigent,  for in this case it is an important  need.
If his need from reading  those  books  is to learn from  it, and derive  benefit  for 
himself,  like his keeping  the books  of medicine  in order  to treat therewith  himself  
or the books of religious  teaching  from which he receives  admonition:  if the 
town  has a physician  or a religious  preacher,  there  will be no need for him, and if 
it has none,  he will be then needed  for. Furthermore,  he might  not be in need of 
going  through  the book  except  after a period  of time, and in this case, he should  
adjust  such a period  in accordance  with the requirement  of his need. The most  
reasonable  thing  to say is that whatever  the man does not need  within  the course  
of the current  year may be spared  and dispensed  with.
If man has something  left over from his daily food he would be under  
obligation  to pay the obligator  charity  <?/'breaking  the fast of Ramadan.  Since we 
reckon  food on the basis of a day we should  reckon  home  furniture  and bodily  
clothes  on the basis of a year. Thus,  the summer  clothes  are not sold in winter  
time and vice versa.  The books  in this respect  are more similar  to clothes  and 
furniture  than to anything  else. One may possess  two copies  of the same book  
and at the same time, he has need of only one of them.  If he is to say that one is 
more correct  and the other  is smarter,  and he is in need of both,  we would  say: 
"You should  be satisfied  with the more correct  copy and sell the smarter,  letting  
pleasure  and luxury  alone."  If he has two versions  of a work on the same field,  
one extensive  and another  brief,  let him first define  his purpose:  if his purpose  of 
having  the work is to derive  benefit  for himself,  let him be satisfied  with the 
extensive,  and if his purpose  is instruction  and teaching,  he would  then be in 
need of both the extensive  and brief  versions  for each has distinctive  features  not 
found  in the other.
Such cases are numerous  and unlimited,  and have not been dealt with in the 
science  of jurisprudence.  We have come  upon  this topic  here only because  of the 
general  nature  of such cases and to point out the superiority  of the position  
adopted  here to the others,  yet, it is impossible  to survey  all these  cases because  
such survey  goes beyond  the house furniture  into further  investigation  of each  
particular  house,  its area, the quantity,  number,  and kind of its furniture,  and even  
the kind of clothing  one has. These  things  have no exact definitions  and each  
jurisprudent  applies  his own interpretation  in an attempt  to perfect  definitions  
thereby  to avoid the dangers  of suspicions.  The pious  person  chooses  the safest425


Page 428:
426 The quarter  of the acts of worship
course  of conduct,  abandoning  what  is suspicious  to what  is not suspicious.  The  
problematic  intermediate  degrees  between  the two definite  and contrasting  
extremes  are indeed  numerous  and nothing  saves one from being  involved  in 
them  except  precaution;  and Allah  knows  best.
The third  group  corresponds  to the employees  to administer  the objects  of 
charity.  This group  implies  the workers,  other  than the ruler and the judge,  who  
are appointed  to collect  the objects  of charity,  including  the tribal chief, the 
registerer  , the collector  (of  charity  objects ), the keeper,  and the porter.  They  are paid  
equally,  and if anything  is left over from their eighth  after all have been paid, it 
should  be transferred  to the other  groups,  and if their  portion  decreases,  it should  
be completed  from  other  returns.
The fourth  group  corresponds  to those whose  hearts  have been (recently)  
reconciled  to Islam;  and they include  the nobles,  who have embraced  Islam,  and 
tiey have authority  among  their peoples,  and giving  them (out of the charity)  
affirms  their faith in Islam,  and exhorts  their fellows  and followers  to embrace  
Islam.
The fifth group  corresponds  to those  slaves  who have written  deeds  of their  
freedom  in return  for a certain  sum of money.  The share  of such should  be paid  
to his master,  and if it is paid to the slave himself,  it will be permissible.  
Furthermore,  the master  should  not pay the obligatory  charity  due upon his 
property  to his slave  who has a written  deed of freedom  from  him, for he is still a 
slave  belonging  to him.
The sixth group  corresponds  to the debtors;  and such a debtor  is he, who  
takes money  as a loan to do a good  work,  or what  is permissible,  and at the same  
time, he is poor (who has no power  to repay  his debt).  But if he takes a loan to 
commit  a sin, he should  not be given  unless  he turns to Allah  in repentance  first.  
If he is rich, his debt should  not be fulfilled  (from  the objects  of charity)  unless  
his borrowing  the money  is for a public  interest,  or for holding  back  an affliction.
The seventh  group  corresponds  to the fighters  (in Allah's  Cause),  who are 
not enlisted  in the commissary  registry.  A share  (of the obligatory  charity)  should  
be paid to them,  even though  they are rich, as a means  of aid for them in their  
fighting.
The eighth  group  corresponds  to the wayfarers;  and a wayfarer  is he, who  
has set out on journey  from his town,  in order  not to commit  any sin , or such as 
passing  by a certain  town. He should  be given (a share from the obligatory  
charity)  if he is poor;  and if he has property  in another  town,  he should  be given  
as much  as to enable  him to reach  it.
But, you might  say: "With  which  signs should  this qualities  be recognized?"  we 
then might  reply: As for poverty  and neediness,  they might  be known  by the 
statement  of the recipient  who is not required  to bring  about  any evidence  or to 
take oath (in confirmation  to his saying),  but it is permissible  to accept  his 
statement  , particularly  if it is not known  that he tells lies. As for both fighting


Page 429:
Book  five: The mysteries  of obligatory  charity  
and journey,  it is a future  event,  and thus such should  be given  on the basis of his 
statement:  "I'm going  to set out for fighting  (in the Cause  of Allah)."  if he does  
not fulfill  it, what he has taken  should  be brought  back. But the evidence  should  
be brought  about  in relation  to the other  groups.  This is the conditions  of the 
claim (to receive  the obligatory  charity),  and as far as the amount  due to each, it 
will be discussed  later.427
On Exposition  Of The Recipient's  Duties
They  are five duties,  and they  go as follows:
The first: that he should  know  (for certain)  that Allah  Almighty  ahs enjoined  
the giving of obligatory  charity  to him in order to be sufficed  against  his 
concerns,  and reduce them to only one. Allah Almighty  commanded  the 
creatures  to worship  Him, provided  that their concern  should  be only with one,  
i.e. with Allah Almighty,  and the Last Day, and this is what the following  Holy  
statement  of Allah implies:  "I have only created  Jinns and men, that they may  
serve  Me." (Adh-Dhariyat  56)
i O VJ J-W'j h>- Cj $
but, when wisdom  has ordained  that man should  be subject  to desires  and 
needs which divert his attention  (from Allah Almighty  and the Last Day) it 
became  out of (Allah ’s) generosity  to bestow  such of bounties  as sufficient  to 
meet those needs. Hence,  Allah Almighty  created  wealth in abundance  and 
caused  it to flow in the hands  of His servants  to be a means  of meeting  their  
needs and freeing themselves  from want in order to devote themselves  
wholeheartedly  to His service.
To some He gave amply  and made  their wealth  a cause  of affliction  and trial,  
thereby  exposing  them to the danger.  Others  He loved  and protected  from (the 
pleasures  and vanities  of) this world,  in the same  way as a pitying  man guards  his 
patient  against  injuries.  Thus, He kept them away from the comforts  of this 
world  and gave them provisions  according  to their minimum  needs,  by imposing  
upon the rich to supply  them,  so that the task of toiling  and labouring  to earn a 
living  might  fall on the rich, while  its benefits  flow to the poor  and indigent,  who,  
consequendy,  they could be able to devote  themselves  wholeheartedly  to the 
service  of Allah Almighty  in preparation  for what awaits them after death.  
Neither  the pleasures  (and vanities)  of this world would  divert them from the 
service  of Allah  Almighty,  nor would  poverty  and distress  occupy  them from the 
preparation  for the hereafter.  This is the utmost  of grace  and blessing.
Furthermore,  it befits  the poor  to know  the value  of poverty,  and is assured  of 
the fact that Allah's  Bounty  upon  him in connection  with what He has kept away  
from him is far greater  than His in relation  to what  He has given  him, as it will be 
explained  in more details  in the Book  of Poverty  Allah  Willing.  So, let him take  
what he takes from Allah Almighty  as a source  of sustenance  and a means  of 
helping  him serve Allah Almighty,  with the intention  to become  much  stronger


Page 430:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
therewith  in his obedience  to Allah  Almighty;  and if he could  not, let him then  
spend  it in what  has been  made  permissible  by Allah  Almighty.  But if he uses it to 
commit  a sin, he will become  ungrateful  to the graces  and blessings  of Allah,  and 
deserving  of His disfavour  and wrath.
The second  duty:  let the recipient  give thanks  to the almsgiver,  invoke  good  
upon him, and praise  him with good praise,  in such a way as to make him no 
more  than an intermediary,  even  though  a means  through  which  Allah's  grace  has 
reached  him; and of a surety,  the means  has its own right  as being  made  by Allah  
Almighty  an intermediary  access and means;  and of course,  this does not 
contradict  the vision  of Allah Almighty  as the only source  of the blessing.  The 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "He, who  
does not thank  the people  (for their gifts) has, indeed,  not given  thanks  to Allah  
Almighty  (for His blessing)."  In many places,  Allah Almighty  appreciates  His 
servants  for their good works,  and it is He Who has created  those works,  and 
created  the power  and capability  of doing  them,  a mention  might  be made  here  
of the statement  of Allah  Almighty:  " how excellent  in Our service!  ever did he 
turn (to Us)!" (Sad 30) there  are many  like this.
Let the recipient  say in his invocation  (for the almsgiver):  "Might  Allah  purify  
your  heart  among  the hearts  of the pious,  and justify  your  work  among  the works  
of the good righteous,  and bless your spirit among  the spirits  of the martyrs."  
The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "Reward  
such as does a favour  to you; and if you could  not do, at least  invoke  good  upon  
him until you know  you have rewarded  him." It is out of the perfect  thanks  to 
conceal  the defects  of the gift if it has any, and not to look down  upon  it, nor try 
to find fault with it, nor put the giver  to shame  of tightfistedness  if he withholds  
it. let the recipient  also magnify  his (the giver's)  doing  in the sight of himself  as 
well as of the people,  since the duty of the giver  is to belittle  his giving,  and that 
of the recipient  is to be under  obligation  and magnify  it; and it is incumbent  upon  
each servant  to do his own duty, and there is no contradiction  in this matter,  
since the causes  of both magnifying  and belittling  (the gift) counterbalance  each  
other. What benefits  the giver is to observe  the causes  of belittling,  and the 
opposite  of that harms  him, whereas  what  benefits  the recipient  is the opposite  of 
that, and vice versa.  But all of that does not contradict  the vision  that the blessing  
comes  only from Allah  Almighty.  The one who does not see the intermediary  
only as an instrument  (in the Hand  of Allah  Almighty)  has proved  ignorant;  and 
what  is disapproved  is to see the intermediary  as the origin  (of things).
The third  duty:  let the recipient  look at what  he takes:  if it is not from  lawful  
sources,  he should  refrain  from  accepting  it; and verily,  "He,  who fears Allah  (and  
safeguard  himself  from His punishment),  He makes for him a way-out  and 
provides  him with  sustenance  from  sources  which  he expects  not." (At-Talaq  2:3)428


Page 431:
Book  five: The mysteries  of obligatory  charity
However,  such as refrains  from what is unlawful  never fails to be provided  
with sustenance  from lawful  sources  opened  to him (by Allah  AJmighty).  Let not 
him, for example,  accept  from the wealth  of the Turks,  nor of the soldiers  and 
the viceroys  of the magistrates,  nor from such as whose  income  is mosdy  
unlawful  unless  he is in dire distress,  and he does not know  the original  owner  of 
that which  he receives:  in this case, let him take just what meets  his needs;  and 
the legal verdict  in this respect  is that he should  spend  it in charity  in the ways  
which will be explained  later in the Book of What is Lawful  and What is 
Unlawful.  This is in case he fails to get what is lawful.  But if he takes such as 
whose  source  is unlawful,  it will not be considered  as obligatory  charity,  since  
there  is no obligatory  charity  due upon  what  is unlawful.
The fourth  duty:  let the recipient  avoid  the points  of suspicion  and doubt  in 
the amount  which  he receives  (as alms).  This means  that he should  not take more  
than what  is permissible,  and should  not take unless  he is sure of possessing  the 
same qualities  which  give him the claim (over it): if he is receives  it because  of 
fulfilling  his written  deed (of freedom)  or debt, let not him take more than the 
amount  of the debt; and if he takes because  of his work (in administering  the 
funds  of charity),  let not him take more  than the charge  of his fellows,  and even  if 
he is given  more,  he should  refrain  and reject  to accept  it, since  the property  does  
not belong  to the giver  so that he would  dispose  of it as he wills;  and if his claiq  
(over  the obligatory  charity)  is because  of being  a traveller,  let not him take mot  
than what is sufficient  to supply  for his provisions  and hiring the means  of 
conveyance  to the place of destinadon;  and if his claim is because  of being a 
fighter  (in Allah's  Cause),  let not him take more  than what he needs,  particularly  
horses,  weapons  and expenses,  the amount  of which  could  not be determined,  
except  by way of independent  opinions;  and the same is true of the journey  
provisions.  But it is out of piety  to avoid  what  arouses  his doubt  to that in which  
he has no doubt.
If his claim  (over  charity)  is through  poverty  and neediness,  let him consider  
first, whether  there  is, in his house  furniture  or in his bodily  clothes,  anything  to 
dispense  with in itself,  or dispense  with  its great  value,  through  exchanging  it for 
what  is sufficient  (which  might  be cheaper  and lesser  in value),  and make  use of 
the difference  of value.  All these things  depend  primarily  on his own choice  and 
opinion  and involve  two states:  one according  to which  it is clearly  certain  that he 
is deserving  and its opposite,  according  to which it is certain  that he is not 
deserving;  and between  both extremes,  there are suspicious  states; and of a 
surety,  he, who comes  round  the protected  zone is about  to fall into it. it also 
depends  upon  the apparent  saying  of the recipient.
The needy persons,  in estimating  their needs, are different  in relation  to 
strictness  or generosity.  The pious  is apt to be very strict  whereas  the devious  is 
inclined  to be generous  to the extent  that he regards  himself  in need of many  
things,  all of which  are abhorred  by Law. When  the amount  of his need has been429


Page 432:
430 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
determined,  he should  not take more  but rather  should  take what  is sufficient  for 
his need  within  one year beginning  with the time of payment.  For this is the limit  
which  the Law allows,  since with the lapse of each year the occasions  of the 
income  are repeated.  Moreover,  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" himself  stored  a year provisions  for his dependents.  This is 
the nearest  limit to define the status of the poor and needy indigent.  If the 
recipient  would  limit himself  to the need of one month  or even that of one day 
he would  become  much  closer  to piety.
The opinions  of the learned  men pertaining  to the amount  received  from  
the obligatory  charity  are different.  Some  would  go in restriction  to the limit of 
reducing  it to a very little amount  and require  that one should  limit himself  to 
no more than his daily food, depending  upon the narration  which is 
transmitted  on the authority  of Sahl Ibn Al-Hanzhaliyyah,  that the Messenger  
of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" forbade  begging  with  
richness.  He was asked about the limit of richness  (which  would prevent  
begging),  thereupon  he said: "It is that one should  have (what  supplies  for) his 
lunch and supper."  Others  are of the opinion  that he should  take until he 
reaches  (but not go beyond)  the limit of richness;  and such limit of richness  in 
their sight is the minimum  amount  liable to obligatory  charity,  since Allah  
Almighty  has not enjoined  the obligatory  charity  but upon  the rich among  the 
people.  They  say that "He is allowed  to take for himself,  as well as on behalf  
of each member  of his dependents  the minimum  amount  liable to the 
obligatory  charity."
According  to others,  the limit of richness  is (no less than) fifty Dirhams  or its 
value from gold, they rely here on the narration  on the authority  of Ibn Mas'ud,  
in which  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said:  
"He, who begs (others)  and he has got as much property  as to make him 
independent,  will come  on the Day of Judgement,  with his face full of scars and 
scratches."  He was asked:  "What  does make  him independent  (and able to meet  
his needs)?"  he said: "Fifty  Dirhams  or its equivalent  from gold."  But it is said 
that the narrator  of this tradition  is not reliable  enough.  This amount  is reported  
to be forty,  depending  upon  the narration  of Ata' Ibn Yasar,  according  to which  
the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "He, who  
begs (others)  while  he has as much  as is equal  to an ounce  (forty  Dirhams)  has, 
indeed,  been  importunate  in begging."
On the other  hand, some people  have exceeded  the due limits  in generosity,  
saying  that "He is allowed  to take as much  as suffices  him to purchase  a whole  
village therewith  he becomes  independent  along his lifetime,  or prepare  
merchandise  for traffic  therewith  he becomes  independent  along his lifetime";  
and this is the concept  of richness  in their sight. According  to Umar  Ibn Al- 
Khattab:  "When  you give (gifts to others),  you should  enrich  (such  as you give)."  
Some  people  go as far in this respect  as to think  that if one , is reduced  to poverty


Page 433:
Book  five: The mysteries  of obligatory  charity
(after  being  rich) he is allowed  to take (from  the obligatory  charity)  as much  as is 
sufficient  to restore  him to his former  state of richness,  even though  it is ten 
thousand  Dirhams,  provided  that he should  not exceed  the limit  of moderation.
When the attention  of Abu Talhah  was diverted  by his garden  during  the 
prayer,  he said: "I've made it an object  of charity."  The Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "Give  it as a gift to your kinship,  
since this is good for you." He distributed  among  Hassan  Ibn Thabit  and Abu  
Qatadah;  and verily,  a garden  fenced  with date-palms  to be distributed  among  
only two men is too much  to enrich  them (along  the rest of their lifetime).  It is 
also reported  that Umar  gave a desert  Arab a she-camel  in addition  to its baby  
camel.  This is what might  be related  in connection  with the generosity  (in the 
distribution  of almsgiving).
As to reducing  (the given share of the obligatory  charity  to no more than) an 
individual's  daily  food or an ounce  of gold,  it has been  mentioned  in connection  
with the dislike  of begging  and frequenting  the gates of houses,  both of which  
are undesirable  and subject  to another  rule. Indeed,  to give concession  to one 
to receive  as much  of the obligatoiy  charity  as enables  him to buy a whole  village  
so that he might  become  independent  for the rest of his life is more probable  
although  it is apt to be extravagant.  But what  is much  closer  to moderation  is to 
take an amount  sufficient  for the current  year. To exceed  this limit  is dangerous  
and to fall short of it is strict. In all these, unless the Law offers a definite  
restriction,  the independent  interpreter  of the Law can do nothing  but hanc  
down  a judgment  according  to the best of his knowledge  and say to the pious  
the same as the Messenger  of Allah himself  had said, i.e. "Seek the verdict  of 
your own heart although  you have been given  dispensation."  But since "sin is 
heart  alluring",  the recipient  should,  once he feels he takes anything  (doubtful),  
fear Allah and not justify his act by a dispensation  which he might have  
received  from learned  men (although  well-versed)  in the letter  of the Law (they  
are not so in its spirit). For their dispensations  are (pursuant)  to rules and 
regulations,  particular  and general,  dictated  by necessity  and expedience  and are 
full of conjectures  and suspicions.  To guard against  such suspicions  is what  
characterizes  those  of religion  and travellers  on the way to the hereafter.
The fifth duty: let the recipient  ask the almsgiver  about the amount  of the 
obligatory  charity  due upon his property,  and consider:  if he what receives  is 
more than the eighth,  let not him accept  it, since the share of him, as well as of 
his two partners  (in the same group)  is no more  than one-eighth  (the amount  of 
the obligatory  charity).  Let him further  reduce  from the eighth  as much as is 
sufficient  for two of his group  (so that the shares  of the three should  be equal).  
However,  this inquiry  is binding  upon most of the people,  who do not observe  
this way of distributing  the obligatory  charity,  either  because  of their ignorance,  
or because  of their indulgence.  It is permissible  to ignore  the inquiry  into these,  
things  if it does not appear  (to the recipient)  what  might  arouse  his suspicion  of431


Page 434:
432 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
their being  unlawful.  The questions  relating  to begging  and the different  degrees  
of probability  will be discussed  in the Book on what is Lawful  and what is 
Unlawful,  Allah  Willing.
CHAPTER  FOUR
ON THE VOLUNTARY  CHARITY:  ITS EXCELLENCE,  AND THE  
PROPRIETIES  OF RECEIVING  AND GIVING  IT
The Exposition  Of The Excellence  Of Charity
From amongst  the different  traditions  and narrations,  a mention  might  be 
made  of the following:
The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "Give  
in charity  even (as little as) a single  date, for the (object  of) charity  satisfies  the 
need of the hungry,  and extinguishes  the (harmful  effects  of the) sin in the same  
way as water extinguishes  fire." The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" said: "Safeguard  yourselves  from the fire (of Hell) even  with  
half  a date (to be given  in charity);  and if you could  not find, let it be with a good  
word."  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said:  
"No Muslim  servant  gives  anything  in charity  from his lawful  earnings,  and Allah  
Almighty  never  accepts  but what  is lawful,  but that Allah  Almighty  takes it with  
His Right  Hand  and enlarges  its reward  (for such as gives it) in the same  way as 
anyone  of you brings  up his baby horse,  until a date would  become  (as huge)  as 
(the mountain  of) Uhud."
The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said to Abu  
Ad-Darda':  "When  you cook soup, make much  its water,  and invite  a family  of 
your neighbours  to share  it with you."  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  
and peace be upon him" said: "No servant  gives in charity  generously  but that 
Allah Almighty  makes his heirs properly  worthy  of his inheritance."  The  
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "Every  man  
will be in the shade  of his almsgiving  (on the Day of Judgement)  until the cases  
of the people  should  be decided."  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon him" said: "The (object  of) charity  closes  seventy  gates of evil."  
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" further  said:  
"The (object  of) charity  to be given  in secrecy  extinguishes  the anger  of the Lord  
Almighty."
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "The  
reward  of) such as gives  in charity  out of abundance  is not better  than that of him 
who accepts  because  of his need and want."  Perhaps  he means  here such as 
intends,  by averting  his need and want, to devote  himself  wholeheartedly  to his 
religious  service,  who is then equal to the almsgiver,  who intends,  by his giving,  
to secure  the welfare  of his religion.  Once,  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him" was asked:  "Which  kind of charity  is the best?"  
he said: "It is to give in charity  while you are healthy,  hoping  to live more,  and 
feeling  afraid of poverty,  without  waiting  until when (you approach  death and)


Page 435:
Book  five: The mysteries  of obligatory  charity  
your soul reaches  the throat,  you say: "Let such and such (money)  be for so and 
so, and let such and such be for so and so; and so and so should  have such and 
such."
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said one 
day to his companions:  "Give in charity!"  one of them said: "I have a Dinar  
(should  I give it in charity)?"  he said: "Spend  it on yourself."  He said: "I have  
another  one." He said: "Then,  spend  it on your wife." He said: "I have a third  
one." He said: "Then  spend  it on your dependents."  He said: "I have a fourth  
one." He said: "Spend  it on your servant."  He said: "I have a fifth one." He said:  
"Then,  you know  better  how to dispose  of it." The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "The (objects  of) charity  are unlawful  for 
the family  of Muhammad  (to take) since they are the impurities  of the people  
(therewith  they purify  themselves  and their property)."  He further  said: "Remove  
the beggar's  need (which  has forced  him to begging)  with even a morsel  of food  
(as little) as the bird's  head."  The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon  him" said: "If the beggar  is true (to his need of begging)  not prosper  will 
he, who returns  him with  nothing."
Jesus "Peace  be upon him" said: "If one returns  a beggar  from his house  
with nothing,  the angels  do not enter that house  for as long as seven  days."  
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" used to do 
two things,  which  he never  entrusted  to anyone  to do on his behalf:  he used  
to prepare  (the water of) his ablution  at night (in a water-skin)  which he 
would  cover;  and he used to give the needy  indigent  with his own hand.  The 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "The  
needy  indigent  is not he, who is dismissed  with a date or two, or a morsel  or 
two; but the real needy indigent  is he, who refrains  from begging  others,  
recite, if you so like, Allah's saying: "They never beg the people  
importunately.""  (Al-Baqarah  273)433
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "No  
Muslim  dresses  another  Muslim  (in a dress)  but that the former  remains  in the 
protection  of Allah Almighty  as long as even a shred  of that (dress)  remains  on 
his body."
As for the historical  sayings  in this connection,  a mention  might  be made  of 
the following:
According  to Urwah  Ibn Az-Zubair:  "A'ishah  gave in charity  fifty thousand  
(Dinars),  even though  her garment  was full of patches."  In his comment  on the 
statement  of Allah: "And they feed, for the love of Allah, the indigent,  the 
orphan,  and the captive"  (Al-Insan  8)
4. (JfJ ^
"They  do so in spite of their great  love and longing  for food."  Umar  (Ibn Al-


Page 436:
434 The quarter  of the acts of worship
Khattab)  used to say: "O Allah!  bestow  plenty  (and abundance  of blessings)  upon  
the generous  among  us, perchance  they would  return  its benefit  to the needy  
among  us." According  to Umar  Ibn Abd Al-Aziz:  "The  prayer  conveys  you to the 
middle  of the way, fasting  the gate of the King,  and almsgiving  admits  you to His 
Presence."  According  to Ibn Abu Al-Ja'd:  "No doubt,  an object  of charity  closes  
seventy  doors  of evil; and of a surety,  an object  of charity  to be given  in secrecy  is 
seventy  times greater  than that given in public,  and it dislodges  the jaws of 
seventy  devils."  According  to Ibn Mas'ud:  "A man kept worshipping  Allah  
Almighty  for seventy  years,  and then he committed  fornication,  which  rendered  
his deed fruitless.  He passed  by a needy  indigent,  whom  he gave a loaf in charity,  
thereupon  Allah  Almighty  forgave  for him his sins, and restored  to him the deed  
of the seventy  years."
Luqman  said to his son (by way of advising  him): "When  you commit  a sin, 
give in charity  (to remove  its evil effect)."  Yahya  Ibn Mu'adh  said: "I do not know  
a grain  (as heavy  as) to have  the weight  of the mountains  of this world  other  than  
the grain  which  is given  in charity."  According  to Abd Al-Aziz  Ibn Abu Rawwad:  
"It is said that three things  are of the treasures  of the Garden  (of Paradise):  to 
conceal  the sickness,  to give in charity  secredy,  and to keep silent  at the time of 
calamities."  According  to Umar  Ibn Al-Khattab:  "The deed vied in glory with  
each other,  thereupon  the charity  said: "I'm the best and most excellent  among  
you all." Abdullah  Ibn Umar used to give sugar in charity  and say: "Allah  
Almighty  says: "By no means  should  you attain  righteousness  until you spend  out 
of what  you love" (A1 Imran  92)
4 © Is*" ty&dt
And Allah  Almighty  knows  that I love sugar."  An-Nakh'i  said: "If there is a 
thing  to be given  (in charity)  for the Sake of Allah,  I will not be pleased  to see a 
defect  in it."
According  to Ubaid  Ibn Umair:  "On the Day of  Judgement,  the people  will be 
mustered  as hungry  as they have never  been before,  as thirsty  as they have never  
been before,  and as naked  as they have never  been before:  he, who gave food (in 
charity)  for the Sake of Allah  Almighty,  would  be given  food by Allah  Almighty,  
and he, who provided  others  with  water  for the Sake of Allah  Almighty  would  be 
given  water  by Allah  Almighty,  and he, who dressed  others  for the Sake of Allah  
Almighty,  will be dressed  by Allah Almighty."  Al-Hassan  said: "Had Allah  
Almighty  willed,  He would  have made  all of you rich, and no poor would  have  
existed  among  you; but He Almighty  has put you to trial by making  some  of you 
responsible  for the support  of others."  according  to Ash-Sha'bi:  "He, who does  
not see himself  more  needy  to the reward  of his object  of charity  than the poor  
to the object  of charity  itself,  will have rendered  invalid  his charity,  and smitten  
his face therewith."
According  to Malik: "We see no blame upon the faithful  believer  to drink  
from the same water  which  he gives in charity,  and provides  others  with in the


Page 437:
Book  five: The mysteries  of obligatory  charity  
mosque,  for it has been intended  to quench  the thirst  of whatever  thirsty,  and not 
intended  to be only for the needy  and indigent  in particular."  It is said that once  
Al-Hassan  came  upon  a slave-trader  having  a slave-girl,  thereupon  Al-Hassan  said 
to him: "Do you accept  one or two Dirhams  for her price?"  he answered  in the 
negative.  On that he said to him: "Go then! Verily,  Allah  Almighty  has accepted,  
for the beautiful  women  of big lustrious  eyes (of the Garden),  a farthing  and a 
morsel  (to be given  in charity)."
The Exposition  Of Giving  Charity  In Secrecy  And In Public
The seekers  of sincerity  are different  in this matter:  some are inclined  to the 
opinion  that it is better  to conceal  the charity,  and others  to the opposite  that it is 
better to make it public. Our aim here is to point out the advantages  and 
disadvantages  of each,  and then uncover  the truth  therein.
As for concealing  it, it has five advantages:
The first is that it is more fitting  to conceal  the identity  of the recipient.  For 
taking  the almsgiving  in public  disgraces  his manhood.  It bares his need and 
forces  him to abandon  the desirable  qualities  of self-restraint  and temperance,  
because  of which  he is regarded  rich by the ignorant.
The second  is that it is safer for the tongues  and hearts  of the people,  for 
they might  envy him, and disapprove  of his receiving  alms, thinking  that he has 
taken  in spite of his being  independent  and free of want and need,  or they might  
accuse  him of receiving  more (than what suffices  him);  and of a surety,  envy,  evil 
suspicion  and backbiting  are from amongst  the major sins; and it is more  
important  to safeguard  them from those crimes.  Abu Ayyub  As-Sikhtiyani  said:  
"Sometimes,  I refrain  from  wearing  a new dress,  lest it might  provoke  the envy  of 
some of my neighbours."  One of the abstinent  people  said: "Perhaps  I refrain  
from  using  a thing,  for fear that some  of my brothers  might  ask: From  where  has 
he got it?" Once,  a shirt  was seen on Ibrahim  At-Taimi,  and he was asked:  "From  
where  have you got that?"  he said: "My brother  Khaithamah  have dressed  me in 
it, and had I known  that his family  would know about it, I would not have  
accepted  it."
The third is to help the almsgiver  do his deeds  secretly,  since the excellence  
of giving  in secrecy  is greater  than that of giving  in public,  and of a surety,  to help  
somebody  complete  his favour  is a favour  in itself. However,  the secret  could  be 
broken  unless  it is between  two; and once the given thing is made public,  the 
almsgiver  would  be known.  One of the people  gave a learned  man something  
apparently,  thereupon  he returned  it (and refused  to accept  it), another  one gave  
him something  in secrecy,  thereupon  he accepted  it. when he was asked  about  
that he said: "This (latter) behaved  politely  and concealed  his gift and thus I 
accepted  it, while the former  behaved  impolitely  and made public  his gift, and 
thus I refused  his gift."
A man gave a Sufi something  before  an assembly  of people,  thereupon  he 
returned  it. he was asked:  "Why have you returned  what Allah AJmighty  had435


Page 438:
436 The quarter  of the acts of worship
given  you (through  His servant)?"  he said: "You have joined  others  with Allah  
in that which  belongs  only to Allah  Almighty,  and have not been satisfied  with  
Allah  Almighty  Alone,  thereupon  I rejected  your joining."  One of the Gnostics  
accepted  something  given  to him in secret,  which  he had rejected  earlier  when  it 
was given to him in public.  When  he was asked about  that he said: "You've  
disobeyed  Allah  by making  public  your gift, and I was not to help you in your  
disobedience;  and when  you obeyed  Him by concealing  your gift, I helped  you 
attain  your righteousness."  Ath-Thawri  said: "Were  I to know  that none of you 
would  make  a mention  of his gift, nor talk about  it before  the people,  I would  
accept  his gift."
The fourth  is that making  public  the gift puts (the recipient)  to humiliation  
and ignominy,  and it is not consonant  with the state of a faithful  believer  to put 
himself  to humiliation.  One of the learned  men used to accept  (gifts)  in secrecy,  
and reject  to take in public  saying:  "Taking  gifts in public  is to put knowledge  to 
humiliation,  and bring shame  on its people;  and I'm not to take anything  from  
this world,  in return  for putting  knowledge  to humiliation  and bringing  shame  on 
its people."
The fifth is to avoid  the suspicion  of partnership.  The Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "He, who is given  a gift, and he 
has some  people  with him, they should  be his partners  in it." that it is in the form  
of gold or silver does not change  it from being  a present.  In this respect  The  
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "The best  
present  a man might  give to his brother  is silver,  or to serve  him with bread."  In 
this way, he made  silver  a present  by itself.  Thus,  it is undesirable  to give a gift in 
public,  unless  it is by consent  of them, even though  it is not far from being  
suspicious,  and to give him in seclusion  is to be safe from  this suspicion.
Giving  gifts in public,  and making  mention  of that has four advantages:
The first is that it gives rise to sincerity,  truthfulness,  freedom  from  
affectation  and hypocrisy.
The second  is that it conquers  vainglory  and haughtiness,  and rather  affirms  
servitude  to Allah and poverty,  and sets man free from arrogance  and self­
independence,  and makes  him of no authority  in the sight of the people.  One of 
the Gnostics  said to his disciple:  "Conceal  not, anyway,  your being  the recipient  
of alms. For when  you receive  alms publicly  this will result  to one of two things:  
you will lose favour  with some  people,  a thing  which  is more  secure  for your  faith  
and more  wholesome  to your soul, or grow  in the regards  of others  because  you 
have revealed  the truth. This is exactly  what your brother  desires  because  his 
reward  increases  as your love to him grows  greater  and your respect  to him 
becomes  more profound.  You also would  be rewarded  because  of your being  
helpful  to bring  about  the increase  in his reward."
The third is that the Gnostic  has no care but for Allah  Almighty.  It is the 
same to him whether  to be given  in secret  or in public,  since  the difference  of his


Page 439:
Book  five: The mysteries  of obligatory  charity  
attitudes  towards  Allah in accordance  with the different  states  is, of a surety,  a 
violation  against  Allah's  Oneness.  One of the people  said: "We did not mind of 
the invocadon  of such as used to accept  the gifts in secrecy,  and reject to take 
them  in public."  However,  to care for the presence  or the absence  of the people  
(at the dme of receiving  alms) is out of lack in the state of mind (towards  Allah  
Almighty),  since one's attendon  should  be paid to the One and Only. In this 
issue,  it is related  that one of the religious  instructors  used to show  his inclinadon  
to one of his pupils  on the exclusion  of the others,  which  was difficult  upon  
them,  he wanted  to demonstrate  to them  the superiority  this pupil  had over  them,  
he gave each of them  a hen and asked  each one to be alone  with it and slaughter  
it in a place  where  none could  see him. Each  went alone  with it and slaughtered  
it, barring  that pupil,  who returned  the hen. When  the religious  instructor  asked  
them they told him that they had done just what they had been commanded  to 
do. He asked that pupil: "Why  have you not slaughtered  yours as your fellows  
have done?"  he said: "I could  not go to a place  where  none could  see me, since  
the Sight  of Allah  Almighty  watches  over me wherever  I'm." on that the religious  
instructor  said: "For this reason  I'm inclined  to him, i.e. for he never  pays his 
attention  but to Allah  Almighty."
The fourth is that to make it public is to establish  the tradition  of 
gratefulness.  Allah  Almighty  says: " But the Bounty  of your Lord;  Rehearse  and 
proclaim!"  (Ad-Duha  11)437
4 Llj ^
But to conceal  (alms)  is to be ungrateful  to the grace  of Allah  Almighty,  Who  
criticizes  such as conceals  what He Almighty  has given him ascribing  him to 
niggardliness  when He says: "(Nor) those who are niggardly,  or enjoin  
niggardliness  on others,  or hide the bounties  which  Allah  has bestowed  on them;  
for We have prepared,  for those  who resist  faith, a punishment  that steeps  them  
in contempt."  (An-Nisa  37)
-'^=*>5 J-UT  ^
4^  lilJlp
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said:  
"When  Allah bestows  a grace upon anyone  of His servants,  He likes that (the 
signs  of) His grace  be visible  on him."
One gave a righteous  man something  in secret,  which  he raised  with his hand  
(so that the people  would  see it) and said: "This belongs  to the world,  in which  
publicity  is better  than secrecy,  whereas  secrecy  is better  in the matter  of the 
hereafter."  So, one of the good  men: "When  you are given  at the presence  of the 
people,  i.e. in public,  accept  it, and return  (with  thanks)  in secrecy."
On the other hand, sticking  to gratitude  and thankfulness  is highly  
recommended.  In this respect,  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and


Page 440:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
peace  be upon  him" said: "He, who give no thanks  to the people  (for their gifts)  
has, indeed,  not been grateful  to Allah  Almighty."  Thankfulness  here stands  in 
the position  of reward  in accordance  with the tradition  of The Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" in which  eh said: "Reward  such  
as does a favour  to you; and if you could  not do, at least invoke  good upon  him 
until you know  you have rewarded  him." When  the Muhajirs  (Emigrants)  said,  
whilst  giving  thanks  to the Ansar  (Helpers):  "O Messenger  of Allah!  we've  never  
seen a people  better  and more  generous  than those (Ansar)  in whose  dwellings  
we've  lived  who made  us share  their  property  with them  to the extent  that we feel 
afraid they would receive  the whole reward (apart from us)." On that The 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "The more  
you give thanks  to them, and praise them (for their favours),  the more you 
reward  them  (for what  they've  done)."
Having  understood  well those advantages,  you should  know that such of 
differences  among  the people  in this respect  as have been handed  down  do not 
pertain  to the question  in itself  so much  as to their  states.  To uncover  the truth of 
this matter,  we do not give a decisive  judgement  that to conceal  almsgiving  is 
more  excellent  in all the states,  as well as to make  it public  is not better  at all. This  
differs  with the difference  of intentions;  and of course  the intentions  differ  with  
the difference  of states and persons.  So, let the sincere  watch  himself  carefully  
lest he be misled  by vanity and beguiled  by the deception  of nature  and the 
artifice  of the devil. Artifice  and deception  are more prevalent  in concealment  
than in publicity,  although  they affect both. Deception  enters into secrecy  
through  the people's  inclination  by nature  to it, seeing  that it helps to maintain  
one's  prestige  and position  before  men,  protect  him from the people's  seeing  him 
with the eye of contempt  and disrespect,  and seeing  the almsgiver  as a benefactor  
and generous  donor.  It is a virulent  disease  which  afflicts  the soul and through  
which the devil makes alluring  the advantages  to the individual,  thereby  
persuading  him to justify  his conduct  with anyone  of the five which  we have  
mentioned.
The criterion  and the acid test which  govern  all of that is one thing,  i.e. that 
the pain such as whose  receiving  alms is revealed  entertains  would  be just the 
same  when  the receiving  of alms taken  by his fellows  is revealed.  If his purpose  is 
to safeguard  the people  from backbiting,  the feelings  of jealousy,  envy and evil 
suspicions,  or to protect  himself  from divulging  the identity,  or to help the 
almsgiver  to adhere  to make  secret  his alms,  or to protect  knowledge  from being  
put to shame,  all of this might  result  from the exposure  of the alms received  by 
his brother.  If the exposure  of his own is harder  on him than that of others,  then  
his apprehensions  regarding  these considerations  are untrue  and false, resulting  
from die artifice  and deception  of Satan.  That's  because  to disgrace  and discredit  
knowledge  is forbidden  not because  it is the knowledge  of this or the other  but 
simply  because  it is knowledge  in itself. Backbiting  is forbidden  because  it is to 
defame  a person's  honour  (in his absence)  as such,  not because  it is the slander  of438


Page 441:
Book  five: The mysteries  of obligatory  charity
the honour  of a certain  person.  Anyone  observing  this point may prove too 
strong  for the devil to conquer,  otherwise  he will be a man of much  activity  but 
little success.
Therefore,  human  nature may incline  to publicity,  because  through  it the 
individual  humours  the giver  and pleases  him thereby  encouraging  him to do the 
same again.  By making  the acceptance  of alms known  to the public,  the recipient  
proves  grateful  before  the people  so that they might  be inclined  to show  respect  
to him and ready  to inquire  about  him and help him more.  This is, to be sure, a 
virulent  ailment  lurking  within  the inside;  and the devil has no power  over the 
religious  one, unless  he makes  this wickedness  seem to him in the form of the 
right way of sunnah,  telling  him that to give thanks  is out of the right way of 
sunnah,  and to conceal  it is out of showing  off, bringing  to him all the advantages  
(of publicity)  which  we've  mentioned,  in order  to lead him to make  it public,  even  
though  his internal  purpose  is (to mislead  and deceive  him as) we've  mentioned  
earlier.
The criterion  of all of that as well as its acid test is to consider  his inclination  
to give thanks  (in both states),  where  the news (of giving)  would  go beyond  the 
almsgiver  and such as whom  he wishes  to give, and in the presence  of some  
people  who dislike  to disclose  the gift, and have desire for concealing  it, whose  
practice  is not to give but such as conceals  it and gives no thanks  for it: if both  
states  are the same to him, let him know  then that the real motif  of thankfulnes*  
is to establish  the right way of giving  thanks  and talk good about the favour,  
otherwise  he is under  the influence  of deception.
Having  come  to know  that the real motif  of his thankfulness  is to establish  the 
right way of giving  thanks,  let not him be heedless  of fulfilling  the right the 
almsgiver  has on him, and consider:  if he is of those who are fond of 
thankfulness  and publicity,  let him conceal  his gift and rather  give no thanks  to 
him, for the best fulfillment  of his right  is not to help him commit  injustice;  and 
verily,  seeking  thankfulness  is out of injustice.  But if he knows,  from his state,  
that he never  likes thankfulness  and does not intend  it (with his gifts), then let 
him give thanks  to him, and make  public  his alms.
For this reason,  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" said in reference  to the one who was praised  before  him: "You've  struck  the 
neck of (and killed)  him. Were he to hear it, he would  never  prosper."  This is 
despite  the fact that The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" praised  a people  in their face because  of his confidence  of their  certainty  (of 
faith),  and his knowledge  that (his praising  them)  would  cause no harm to them  
so much  as it would  make  them more  desirous  to do good.  He told one of them  
that he was the master  and chief  of the Bedouins  of sheep.  The Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said in reference  to another:  
"When  the most  generous  among  his people  comes  to you, you should  deal with  
him generously."
Once  he heard  the speech  of a man,  which  appealed  him and he said: "Verily,  
some speech  is (in its effect like) magic."  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's439


Page 442:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
blessing  and peace be upon him ” said: "If anyone  of you knows  good in his 
brother,  he should  tell him about it, for this prompts  his desire to do more  
good."  The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" further  
said: "When  a faithful  believer  is praised  (for his good faith),  the belief  would  
grow (and become  firm) in his heart."  According  to Ath-Thawri:  "He, who  
recognizes  himself  well (as really he is) no harm will be caused  to him by the 
people's  praising  him." He said to Yusuf  Ibn Asbat:  "If I bestow  a favour  upon  
you, with  which  I'm more  pleased  than you, seeing  that it is a blessing  from Allah  
Almighty  which  He has bestowed  upon  me, you then might  give thanks  (to me),  
otherwise,  give no thanks  then."
These details should  be observed  by anyone  who watches  his heart, for 
without  these  details  the works  of the! Senses  are the laughing-stock  of the devil  
and the object  of his ridicule  and malice  especially  for what seems  to be much  
activity  but little profit. It is such knowledge  which is described  by the 
following  saying,  namely,  "Learning  one point  of such knowledge  is better  than  
a year of worship."  For through  this knowledge  worship  becomes  a living  and a 
vital thing  and without  it, it dwindles  and comes  to naught.  In short,  to take in 
public and to reject in secrecy  is the best and safest policy to follow.  
Furthermore,  no one, in rejecting  a gift, should  be excessive  in his avowal  of 
unworthiness.  Rather  his knowledge  should  be complete  so that both secrecy  
and publicity  would  be the same to him. Such a state is like red sulphur,  often  
heard  of but never  seen:  we ask Allah,  Most  Generous  the good  aid and help to 
attain  success.
The Exposition  Of Which  Is More  Excellent:  Receiving  Voluntary  
Charity  Or Obligatory  Charity
Both Ibrahim  Al-Khawas  and Al-Junaid,  and others  like them were of the 
opinion  of giving preference  to taking from the voluntary  charity  over the 
obligatory  charity,  since to take from the latter  is to compete  with the poor and 
indigent,  and belittle  their share  therefrom,  and because  one might  not have the 
full qualities  which  make  him worthy  of receiving  it, according  to the description  
of the Holy Book (of the Qur'an),  unlike  the voluntary  charity,  which  is more  
embracing.
Others  are of the opinion  that it is better  to accept  the obligatory  and not the 
voluntary  charity,  for the former  is helpful  in fulfilling  what is due; and had the 
needy  indigent  refrained  from receiving  the obligatory  charity,  they would  have  
been sinful.  Furthermore,  there  is no point  for the alms recipient  to be under  any 
obligation,  for the obligatory  charity  is a right due to Allah Almighty,  therewith  
He sustains  the needy  and indigent  among  His servants.  Taking  the obligatory  
charity  depends  upon the need,  and of a surety,  everyone  knows  well his needs,  
whereas  taking  the voluntary  charity  depends  upon the religion,  according  to 
which the almsgiver,  in most cases, gives such as he thinks to be religious.  
Moreover,  accompanying  the indigent  and needy is closer to humility  and 
submission,  and far removed  from arrogance  and haughtiness.  Sometimes,  one440


Page 443:
441 Book  five: The mysteries  of obligatory  charity  
happens  to accept  an object  of charity  as though  it were a present,  without  being  
distinguishable  from  it.
This is to affirm  the humility  and neediness  of receiving  alms.  The truth of the 
matter  in this respect  that this issue  differs  according  to the different  states  of the 
person,  and the kind of attention  which  he has at that time. If he were in doubt  
as to whether  or not he deserved  he should  not accept  anything  from the Zakat.  
But if he were certain  that he was deserving,  as, for example,  when  he has to pay 
a debt which  he had incurred  for a just cause  and is unable  to pay it without  aid, 
then he is certainly  entitled  to that aid and justified  in accepting  it. If a deserving  
individual  were given the choice  between  accepting  aid from the Zakat  or the 
Sadaqah  and had found  out that the person  who is to give the Sadaqab  would  not 
give that particular  sum unless  he were to accept  it, let him by all means  choose  
the Sadaqah,  as the Zakat  which is compulsory  would always be paid to its 
deserving  beneficiaries.  This would  increase  charity  and better  the conditions  of 
the poor. If the money  were to be definitely  given  as a Sadaqah  any way and on 
the other hand the acceptance  of the Zakat  would  not result  in distress  for the 
poor, the person  would  be free to make his choice.  In short the arguments  in 
favour  of the one or the other  vary. On the whole  the acceptance  of aid from  the 
Zakat  is more conducive  to modesty  and humility;  and Allah Almighty  knows  
best.


Page 444:
In the Name  of Allah,  Most  Gracious,  Most  Merciful.
Praise  be to Allah  Who  has made  great His Favour  upon His servants,  when  
He averted  from them  the evil plots and guiles  of Satan,  thwarted  his hopes  and 
frustrated  his schemes:  He made fasting a fortification  and shield for His 
devotees,  therewith  He opened  for them  the gates of the Garden,  and showed  to 
them that the way of Satan to seize their hearts  is their inward  desires,  and by 
overpowering  them, the well-pleasing  soul should become  too strong and 
steadfast  to face its opponent.
Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon (the Prophet)  Muhammad,  the leader  of 
the nation,  and the founder  of the right  way of sunnah,  as well as upon  his family  
and his companions,  of piercing  sights  and sound  minds.
To go further:  fasting  constitutes  one-fourth  the faith,  in accordance  with  
the statement  of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him": "Verily,  fasting  constitutes  half the patience",  and in accordance  with  
his statement:  "Patience  comprises  half the faith". Furthermore,  it is 
distinguished  from the other pillars of service  by its particular  position  to 
Allah Almighty  Who said, as the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" related  from  Him: "Every  good  deed  is rewarded  as much  
as ten to seven  hundredfold,  except  fasting,  for it is done for the Sake of Me, 
therewith  I give reward  (as much  as I will)."  Allah  Almighty  says (in His Holy  
Book):  "those  who patiently  persevere  will truly receive  a reward  without  
measure!"  (Az-Zumar  10)
Fasting  comprises  (as we have mentioned)  half the patience,  since its 
reward  goes beyond  the limit of estimation  and calculation.  It is sufficient  for 
you to know  its excellence  and superiority  to read the saying  of the Messenger  
of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him": "By Him in Whose  Hand  
is my soul! The unpleasant  smell coming  out from the mouth  of a fasting  
person  is much sweeter  in Allah's  Sight than that of musk. Allah Almighty  
says: 'He has refrained  from  his (sexual)  desire,  left his food and drink  for the 
Sake of Me: fasting  then is done for My Sake, therewith  I give reward  (as 
much  as I will)'."
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "In 
the Garden,  there is a door called Rayyan,  from which none will enter (the 
Garden)  except  the fasting  persons."  Such (fasting)  has been given promise  to
442


Page 445:
Book  six: the mysteries  of fasting
meet Allah  Almighty  (in the hereafter)  because  of his fasting,  the Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "A fasting person  
experiences  two joys: one at the time of breaking  his fast, and the other on 
meeting  his Lord Almighty."  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon  him" said: "Everything  should  have a gateway,  and fasting  is the gateway  
of the religious  service."  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon  him" said: "Verily,  the sleep  of a fasting  person  is worship."
It is narrated  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that the Messenger  of Allah  
“Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him” said: “When  the month  of Ramadan  
comes  upon you, the gates of the Garden  will be opened,  and none of them  
will be closed,  the gates of the fire (of Hell) will be closed,  and none of them  
will be opened,  and Satans  and the rebellious  transgressors  from amongst  the 
jinns will be fastened  (by chains  and shackles),  and. Then,  a caller  will call: 'O 
one who seeks  good!  Come  (and do good as much  as you could)!  O petitioner  
of evil! Desist (from doing evil and rather turn to doing good)!"'  in his 
comment  on Allah's  saying:  "Eat you and drink you, with full satisfaction;  
because  of the (good)  that you sent before  you, in the days that are gone!"  
(Al-Haqqah  24)443
i (®) 4 i/ »
"Those  are the days of fasting,  on which  they left food and drink."
The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" joined  both  
abstinence  and fasting  in the same rank which  Allah  Almighty  acclaims  to His 
angels.  He told: "Allah  Almighty  shows  pride  because  of the worshipping  young  
man saying:  'O young  man who has left your desires  and devoted  your youth  
entirely  to Me! You are, in My Sight,  in the same  rank of some  of My angels.'"  the 
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said concerning  the 
fasting  person:  "Allah  Almighty  says: "Behold  O My angels  to this servant  of 
Mine!  He has left his desire,  pleasure,  food and drink  for My Sake."  In comment  
on the Holy  statement  of Allah  Almighty:  " Now  no person  knows  what  delights  
of the eye are kept hidden  (in reserve)  for them, as a reward  for their (good)  
Deeds"  (As-Sajdah  17)
i CP oj C* o? f4^ ^ ^
Their  work (in the world)  was fasting,  and this is because  He Almighty  says:  
"those  who patiently  persevere  will truly receive  a reward  without  measure!"  (Az-  
Zumar  10)
4 © J±*i 1 j 'y. J \
Thus  the reward  of the fasting  man will be given  amply  and abundantly  and it


Page 446:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
will be beyond  imagination  or estimate.  It is fitting  to be so, because  fasting  
belongs  to Allah Almighty  and, by virtue  of this relation,  it has been rendered  
noble,  although  all the acts of worship  belong  to Allah Almighty,  just as the 
Sacred  House  2' has been made noble  by its special  relation  to Allah  Almighty,  
although  the whole  earth  is His.
There  are two points  for which  fasting  belongs  to Allah  Almighty:  the first is 
because  it is a form of desisting  and renunciation  in its very nature  hidden  from  
human  sight,  whereas  all the other  acts of worship  are apparent  and exposed  to it. 
It stands  alone as the only act of worship  which  is not seen by anyone  except  
Allah Almighty.  It is an inward act of worship  performed  through  sheer  
endurance  and perseverance.  The second is because  it is a means of 
overpowering  Allah's  enemy,  Satan,  whose  means  to prevail  over man is desires  
which  are strengthened  by eating  and drinking.  For this reason  the Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "Verily  Satan reaches  
everywhere  in mankind  in the same  way the blood  circulates  in the body.  Make  it 
then difficult  for Satan  by means  of hunger."  For the same reason  the Messenger  
of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said to A'ishah:  "Persist  in 
knocking  the door  of the Garden."  She asked:  "With  what shall I knock  the door  
of the Garden?"  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon  
him" said: "With  hunger."  However,  the excellence  of hunger  will be discussed  
later,  Allah  Willing,  in detail  in the Book  of the evil of gluttony,  and its remedy,  in 
the quarter  of the destructives.
Whereas  fasting  in particular  (apart from the other religious  services)  is to 
overpower  Satan,  the enemy  of Allah  Almighty,  close  his path and block  his way,  
it comes  to be worthy  of this distinguished  position  in relation  to Allah  Almighty.  
To overpower  the enemy  of Allah  Almighty  is, in the end, to help Him,  and of a 
surety, Allah's Aid would not come unless men themselves  help Him in 
accordance  with His saying:  " O you who believe!  If you will aid (the cause  of) 
Allah,  He will aid you, and plant  your feet firmly."  (Muhammad  7)
The servant  then should  take the initiative  and begin to strive;  perchance  he 
will be rewarded  with the right  guidance  from Allah  Almighty.
For this reason,  Allah Almighty  says: "And those who strive in Our  
(Cause),  We will certainly  guide them to Our Paths: for verily  Allah is with  
those  who do right."  (Al-Ankabut  69)
0 ^ oli bill b-j >
He further  says: "Verily  never  will Allah  change  the condition  of a people  until  
they change  it themselves  (with their  own souls)."  (Ar-Ra'd  11)444
i


Page 447:
Book  six: the mysteries  of fasting --------------
iO rr ^ '-i/W  ^
The change  here refers  to the increase  of desires  and lusts, for they are the 
grazing  place and pasturing  land of the devils;  and as long as it is fertile  and 
rich, they would  not cease to frequent  it; and as long as they frequent  it, the 
Glory  of Allah  Almighty  will not be revealed  to the servant,  and thus he will be 
barred  from meeting  Him. The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon him" said: "Had  it not been for the fact that Satans  hover  around  the 
hearts  of the sons of Adam,  they would  have been able to see the dominion  of 
the heavens."
From this perspective,  fasting  has come to be the gateway  of religious  
service,  as well as a shield  (to protect  man from sins and mistakes).  Since its 
excellence  is so great and significant,  it is then incumbent  upon  us to explain  
its internal  and external  conditions,  through  making  a mention  of its pillars  
and regulations,  and its inward  rules;  and this will be achieved  through  three  
chapters.445
CHAPTER  ONE:
ON THE OUTWARD  DUTIES  AND REGULATIONS,  AND THE  
OBLIGATIONS  CONCOMITANT  TO BREAKING  THE FAST
As for the outward  duties,  they are six:
The first is to watch  the commencement  of the month  of Ramadan,  through  
watching  the new moon,  and if it is cloudy  in such a way as to obstruct  the 
people  from seeing  the new moon  (of Ramadan),  complete  the days of Sha'ban  
thirty. We mean by watching  the actual  vision (which  assures  its appearance),  
which  is attested  by the witness  of at least a just person,  but seeing  the new moon  
of the month  of Shawwal  is not attested  except  by the witness  of two just 
persons,  for this is closer to precaution  in the religious  service  (of fasting).  
Fasting  becomes  incumbent  upon such as hears the witness  of a just person,  of 
whose  statement  he is sure, and whom  he thinks  to be reliable,  even though  the 
judge  passes  no decision;  and that's because  every servant  should  follow,  in his 
religious  service,  what  his thought  imposes  upon  him. If the new moon  is seen in 
a town  and not in another,  between  which  there  is a distance  as short  as less than  
a two-day  journey,  fasting  should  become  binding  upon the inhabitants  of both;  
and if the distance  between  them is longer,  let each town follow its own  
judgement,  provided  that what  is incumbent  upon  the one should  not go beyond  
it to the other.
The second  pertains  to the intention.  One should state decisively  and 
deliberately  the intention  every  night  (before  dawn  to observe  fast on the coming  
day). If one states his intention  to observe  the all fasts of Ramadan  with one 
intention,  it will not make  valid his fasting,  and this is what  we meant  by (stating  
the intention)  every  night.  Furthermore,  if he declares  his intention  by day, it will 
not make  valid his fasting  of Ramadan,  or even the obligatory  fasting  at all. But it


Page 448:
446 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
is held valid for the voluntary  fasting;  and this is what  we meant  by (saying  that 
the intention  should  be stated)  at night  before  dawn.  If one states  his intention  to 
observe  fasts absolutely  or the obligatory  fasts with no restriction,  it will not 
make  valid his fasting  until he states  his intention  to observe  the obligatory  fasts  
of Ramadan  enjoined  by Allah  Almighty.
If he states his intention  on the night of suspicion  to observe  fast on the 
coming  day in case it appears  to be the first day of Ramadan,  it will not make  
valid his fasting  since it is not decisive,  unless his intention  relies upon the 
witness  of a just person,  but neither  the possibility  of mistake  or the lie on the 
part of such just witness  would  cancel  out the decisiveness  (of his intention  to 
fast the coming  day), nor would  the concomitant  circumstances  such as doubt  
concerning  the last night of Ramadan  prevent  one from stating  the intention  to 
fast the following  day, nor would  the intention  to fast be affected  if it depends  
upon  mere speculation  as in the case of a person  imprisoned  in a dark dungeon,  
who thinks  that the month  of Ramadan  had come:  his suspicion  thereof  would  
not prevent  him from  stating  the intention  to fast.
If one is uncertain  on the night  of doubt,  the verbal  stating  of his intention  to 
fast would  not be valid because  the very place where  intention  lies is the heart,  
and it is inconceivable  to experience  doubt  in conjunction  with certainty,  just like 
the case of such as says,  while  being  in the middle  of Ramadan  that he would  fast 
the following  day if that day were of Ramadan,  thereupon  no harm would  be 
caused  because  it is mere  repetition  of words,  while  in the very place  of intention  
there  would  be no room  for doubt  or hesitation,  rather  it should  be sure that the 
following  day belongs  to Ramadan.  He who states  his intention  of fasting  during  
the night  and then eats while  it is yet night  his eating  then will not invalidate  his 
intention.  If a woman  in a state of menstruation  states her intention  of fasting  
(during  the night) and she gets clean from her menses  before  dawn, her fast 
would  be held valid.
The third  is to refrain  from  getting  anything  to the inside  of his body  as long  
as he remembers  that he is fasting  however,  his fasting  would  be corrupt  by 
eating,  drinking,  snuffing,  and injecting.  But it would not be invalidated  by 
phlebotomy  and cupping,  nor by forcing  the probe  into the ear or the orifice  of 
the penis unless the probe reaches  the bladder.  Whatever  enters the body  
unintentionally,  such as dust, flies, or water  during  rinsing  the mouth  (in ablution)  
will not invalidate  the fast unless  one goes to excess  in rinsing  his mouth:  in this 
case his fasting  will be invalidated;  and this is because  he will be negligent.  This is 
what  we meant  when  we said ’intentionally'.
We said 'as long  as he remembers  that he is fasting'  in order  to exclude  the one 
who has forgotten  that he was fasting  and whose  eating  will not invalidate  his 
fast. But if one intentionally  eats at any of both ends of the day, and later finds  
that he has eaten  during  the actual  period  of daylight,  it is incumbent  upon  him to 
observe  a fast in lieu. But if he, to the best of his power,  continues  to believe


Page 449:
Book  six: the mysteries  of fasting  
(that he had not eaten  outside  the prescribed  time),  nothing  then is binding  upon  
him. Yet he should  not eat at both ends of the day except  after careful  and 
thorough  observation  (of the time).
The fourth  is to refrain  from  having  sexual  intercourse.  However,  the limit  of 
sexual  intercourse  is the disappearance  of the glands  of the penis (within  the 
vulva).  But to have sexual  intercourse  forgetfully  does not break  fasting.  If he has 
sexual  intercourse  at night, or has a nocturnal  wet dream  with the result that 
morning  entered  upon him while being  in the state of ceremonial  impurity,  he 
should  not break  his fasting.  If dawn  appears  while  he is still copulating  with his 
wife and he then stops immediately,  his fasting  would  be held valid. But if he 
continues  (until he fulfills his desire by ejaculation),  his fasting would be 
corrupted,  and in this case,  atonement  becomes  binding  upon  him.
The fifth  is to abstain  from  masturbation,  either  through  sexual  intercourse  or 
no sexual  relation  for this breaks  fasting.  However,  fasting  is not broken  by one's  
kissing  or sleeping  with his wife,  as long  as this does not lead to seminal  emission;  
but it is undesirable,  unless  he is an old man, or one who is powerful  enough  to 
have control  over his sexual  desire:  in this case, there  is no blame  in kissing,  even  
though  leaving  it is better.  If he feels afraid his kissing  would  lead to seminal  
emission,  but even he kisses,  and the semen  is emitted,  he will have broken  his 
fasting,  in view  of his negligence.
The sixth  is to abstain  from  vomiting,  since it invalidates  fasting.  But, if one 
cannot  help it, his fast remains  valid.  If one swallows  phlegm  or mucus  from his 
throat  or chest,  he will not invalidate  his fast; and this is out of concession  in 
view of being  a common  distress.  But if he swallows  it even after having  gotten  
out to his mouth,  he will break  his fast.
As to the obligations  concomitant  to breaking  the fast, they are four:
Making  amends,  atonement,  ransom,  and abstaining  from food and drink  for 
the remaining  portion  of the day, in imitation  of the fasting  person.
As for making  amends,  it is generally  binding  upon every responsible  
Muslim  who has left fasting,  whether  with or with no legal excuse.  The  
menstruating  woman  should  observe  fasts in lieu of what  she misses  (during  her 
menses),  and so should  the apostate  (who repents).  But no fast in lieu is due 
upon the infidel,  the child,  and the mad. It is not necessary,  for the fasts to be 
observed  in lieu of the missed  ones of Ramadan,  to be consecutively  performed,  
but they might  be either  at different  intervals  or all at once.
As for atonement,  it is not binding  unless  because  of having  sexual  relation  
(with one's wife). But the intentional  seminal  emission,  eating,  drinking,  or the 
like of that, would  not assure  it. the atonement  is to emancipate  a slave;  and if 
one could  not afford  for that, let him observe  fasts for two months  consecutively;  
and if he has no power  to do so, let him then feed sixty needy  indigent  with a 
Mudd  of foodstuff  for each.
In relation  to abstaining  from food and drink for the rest of the day (in 
imitation  of the fasting  persons),  it is obligatory  upon  anyone  who broke  fasting  
(with  no legal excuse)  or failed  to carry  out all its requirements.  The menstruation447


Page 450:
448 The quarter  of the acts of worship
woman  is under  no obligation  to fast for the rest of the day if she has already  got 
clean.  Similarly  the traveller,  who at the end of two days' journey,  arrives  not in a 
state of fasting,  is under  no obligation  to fast for the rest of the day. It is also 
obligatory  to abstain  from food and drink on doubtful  days when only one 
reliable  witness  has declared  that he has seen the new moon.  On the other  hand,  
observing  fast on journey  is better  unless  it is unbearable.  A traveller  should  not 
break his fast on the very day he sets out if he has been resident  in its first 
portion  while  fasting,  nor on the very day of his arrival  if he is fasting.
As for ransom,  it is binding  upon such of pregnant  and suckling  woman  as 
break  their fasting,  for fear for their babes;  and in this case, each day (on which  
she breaks  fasting)  should  be ransomed  by a single  Mudd  of wheat  to be given  to 
an indigent,  and she should  also make  amends  for her missed  fasts. In case of an 
aged man, if he (proves  powerless  and thus) breaks  his fasts, he should  give in 
charity,  for each day he does not fast, a Mudd  (of foodstuff).
As for regulations,  they are six: to delay the time of having  the night meal of 
Suhur  (a short time before  dawn),  to hasten  on to break fasting  with dates or 
water  before  prayer,  refraining  from the use of toothpick  as of the time the sun 
passes  the meridian,  to spend  generously  and copiously  (on the poor and needy)  
during  the month  of Ramadan,  in view  of its good  merits  which  we've  mentioned  
earlier,  to study  the Qur'an,  to practice  I'tikaf  in the mosque,  particularly  during  
the last ten days of Ramadan,  since this was the practice  of the Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him":  whenever  the last ten days (of 
Ramadan)  entered,  he would  fold the bed, straightened  his lower  garment,  and 
strove,  and caused  his family  to strive  themselves  to the utmost  of their power  in 
religious  service  at night,  for the Night  of Power  lies in those  (ten),  and mostly  in 
the odd nights,  particularly  the twenty-first,  the twenty-third,  the twenty-fifth,  and 
the twenty-seventh.
It is better  to stay in retreat  for consecutive  nights.  If one vows,  or professes  
his intention  to stay in retreat  for consecutive  days, this continuity  might  be 
interrupted  by his coming  out with no necessity,  such as, for example,  to visit a 
patient  (to enquire  about  his health),  to follow  a funeral  procession,  to bring  forth  
a witness,  to pay a visit, to renew  his purification;  and it would  not be interrupted  
if he comes  out to answer  the call of nature.  He is allowed  to perform  ablution  in 
his house,  without  turning  to another  occupation.  However,  the Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" used not to come out (of the 
mosque)  but to fulfill his need (of answering  the call of nature),  and not to 
enquire  about  the health  of a patient  but while  passing  by (near  his house).
The continuity  of such stay in retreat  also might  be interrupted  by having  
sexual  intercourse,  but not by kissing.  During  I'tikaf  in the mosque,  there is no 
harm in applying  perfume,  holding  the tie of marriage,  having  food and drink,  
washing  both hands  in a basin,  since  all of that is necessary  (for the body)  during  
the period  of stay. Furthermore,  such continuity  might not be interrupted  by 
getting  a part of one's body  out of the mosque.  In this respect,  the Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" used to draw his head close to


Page 451:
Book  six: the mysteries  of fasting
A'ishah  in order  to comb  his hair, while  she was in her chamber.  Whenever  such  
as in retreat  comes  out to answer  the call of nature  and then returns  once again,  
he should  resume  his intention  to stay in retreat,  unless  he has held his intention  
for ten-day  stay in retreat  in advance,  even though  it is better  for him to make  
renewal  of intention.449
CHAPTER  TWO:
ON THE MYSTERIES  AND INTERNAL  CONDITIONS  OF FASTING
It should  be known  that there are three degrees  of fasting:  the fasting  of the 
public,  the fasting  of the private,  and the fasting  of the elite among  the private.  
The fasting  of the public  applies  to withholding  both the stomach  and the private  
parts from fulfilling  their desires  as we've  explained  in detail  earlier.  The fasting  
of the private  applies  to withholding  hearing,  sight,  tongue,  hands,  feet, and all of 
the parts  of the body  from  committing  sins.
The fasting  of the elite among  the private  applies  to the fasting  of the heart  
from  entertaining  any mean  thoughts  or worldly  concerns,  in such a way as to be 
not concerned  with anything  other  than Allah  Almighty.  But such kind of fasting  
might  be broken  by being involved  in thinking  of anything  other than Allah  
Almighty  and the Last Day, or of the matters  and affairs  of this world  unless  it is 
intended  for the sake of religion,  since  all of that belongs  to the provisions  of the 
hereafter  and not of this world,  to the extent  that led one of these  who have their  
hearts sanctified  to say: "He, who turns his attention,  during  his day, even tc 
make  arrangements  for that with which  he is going  to break  his fast, a sin will be 
written  against  him."  This is due to his lack of confidence  of the Bounty  of Allah  
Almighty,  and the lack of certainty  of his promised  sustenance.  To be sure, this is 
the rank of the Prophets,  the truly faithful  believers,  Allah's  nearest  devotees.  We 
shall have no long discussion  about  its details,  but rather,  let's be concerned  more  
with its practical  side. It is to turn one's whole  and entire attention  to Allah  
Almighty,  and this requires  to divert  it from  anything  else, and to comply  with the 
significance  of the statement  of Allah Almighty:  " Say: "Allah  (sent it down)":  
then leave  them  to plunge  in vain discourse  and trifling."  (Al-An'am  91)
i 'ji j'-ye**-  4 fAj*  £ -0)1 J3 }
As to the fasting  of the private,  which  is the fasting  of the righteous  good  
men,  it is to withhold  the parts of the body  from committing  sins; and it could  be 
achieved  through  six things:
The first is to lower  the gaze,  and hold it back from  extending  to look at all of 
what is blameworthy  and hateful,  as well as at such as occupies  the heart and 
diverts  the attention  from the celebration  of Allah  Almighty.  In this respect,  the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "Verily,  the 
glance  (one might  cast at what  is hateful)  is one of the poisoned  arrows  of Iblis  
might  Allah  curse  him. Such as refrains  from it, for fear of Allah  Almighty,  Allah  
Almighty  bestows  upon him faith, whose  pleasant  sweet  he experiences  in his 
heart." It is further  narrated  on the authority  of Jabir from Anas that the


Page 452:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "Five  things  
break the fast of the fasting  person:  telling  a lie, backbiting,  going  about  with  
calumnies,  taking  a false  oath,  and casting  a lustful  glance."
The second  is to keep the tongue  from  nonsense,  telling  lies, backbiting,  tel1- 
bearing,  speaking  with foul and obscene  language,  desertion,  enmity,  and 
hypocrisy,  and rather imposing  silence upon it, and occupying  it with the 
celebration  of (the Praises  of) Allah  Almighty  and reciting  the Qur'an:  this is the 
fasting  of tongue.  It is narrated  by Bishr  Ibn Al-Harith  that Sufyan  said: "Verily,  
backbiting  corrupts  fasting."  It is further  narrated  by Laith  from Mujahid  that he 
said: "Two  things  corrupt  fasting:  backbiting  and telling  lies." (It is narrated  that)  
the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "Of a 
surety,  fasting  acts as a shield  (to protect  one from the fire of Hell),  and if anyone  
of you is fasting,  he should  not speak with obscenity,  nor behave  ignorantly  
(towards  others),  and if anyone  fights  or quarrels  with him, let him (refrain  from  
fighting  him and rather)  say: "I'm fasting!  I'm fasting!"
It is narrated  that two women  were fasting during the lifetime  of the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" when  the severe  
hunger  and thirst  troubled  them so much  at the end of the day, that they were  
about  to be ruined.  They sent to the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" asking  his permission  for them  to break  their fast. He sent a 
vessel  to them and told (the courier)  to say to them: "Vomit  what you have  
eaten."  One of them  vomited  pure blood  and tender  flesh as much  as half the 
vessel,  and the other vomited  the like of that until the vessel  was filled. The  
people  were astonished  at that. On that the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon  him" said: "Those  (women)  fasted  from  what  Allah  has made  
lawful  for them,  and broke  their fasting  by doing  what  He has made  unlawful  for 
them. One of them sat with the other,  and went on backbiting  the people,  and 
this (which  both vomited)  is what they have eaten of their flesh (through  
backbiting)."
The third is to withhold  hearing  from listening  to what is undesirable  and 
disliked,  for it is forbidden  to pay attention  to that which  is forbidden  to be said.  
For this reason,  Allah Almighty  places  on equal footing  such as hears (what  is 
unlawful)  and the devourer  of what is forbidden  in His statement:  "(They  are 
fond of) listening  to falsehood,  of devouring  anything  forbidden."  (Al-Ma'idah450
42)
^ (jj 11 1
He further  says: "Why  do not the Rabbis  and the doctors  of Law forbid  them  
from their (habit of) uttering  sinful words and eating things forbidden?  Evil  
indeed  are their  works."  (Al-Ma'idah  63)
i © bjZX  ijJ <r £ jJJ  Jr&-  & >
However,  to keep silent  of and pay one's attention  to backbiting  is forbidden,  
otherwise  "you then  will be like them"  (An-Nisa  140)


Page 453:
Book  six: the mysteries  of fasting 451
In accordance  with Allah's  statement.  For this reason,  the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "Both the backbiter  and the 
listener  (to backbiting)  are partners  in the sin."
The fourth  is to withhold  the remaining  parts of the body  from  what  is sinful,  
such as both hands and legs from doing  what is shameful,  the stomach  from  
what is suspicious  at the time of breaking  the fast: there is no significance  for 
fasting,  which  is to refrain  from such of food as is lawful,  and then breaking  the 
fast by such of food as is unlawful.  The example  of such as does so is like him,  
who constructs  a palace  and destroys  a whole  town. However,  the lawful  food  
might  be harmful  by its excess  in quantity  and not by its quality,  and the purpose  
of fasting  is to reduce  the quantity  and rather  induce  moderation.  Similarly,  the 
person  who resorts  to taking  a dose of poison,  for fear of the harmful  effect  of 
an excessive  dose of medicine,  is indeed foolish.  The unlawful  is poison  
detrimental  to religion  while the lawful  is like a medicine  a little of which is 
beneficial  but the excess  of which  is harmful.
The purpose  of fasting  is to reduce the quantity  of food and induce  
moderation,  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him"  
said: "Many  a man gets nothing  out of his fast except  hunger  and thirst,  
that it refers  to the person  who breaks  his fast on what is unlawful.  Others  said 
that it refers to the person  who abstains  from such of food as is lawful,  and 
rather  breaks  his fast by eating  the flesh of the people  through  backbiting;  and of 
a surety,  it is unlawful.  It is also said that this means  such as does not keep the 
parts of his body  from  doing  what  is sinful.
The fifth  is not to take too much  of the unlawful  food at the time of breaking  
fast, in such a way as to fill the inside  of his body,  since there  is no vessel  more  
hateful  in the Sight  of Allah  Almighty  than a stomach  which  is filled with food,  
whatever  lawful  it might  be. How  should  the benefit  of fasting  to overpower  the 
enemy  of Allah and suppress  his own appetite  through  fasting  be achieved  as 
long  as, when  he breaks  his fast, he compensates  himself  for what  he had missed  
during  the day and even gets more kinds of food and drink?  It has become  the 
custom  to store up all the food for the month  of Ramadan,  wherein  food and 
drink  of different  kinds  and colours  are consumed  more  than in several  months.
To be sure, it is a well-known  fact that the purpose  of fasting  is hunger  and 
the suppression  of lust so that the soul might  be able to attain piety. If the 
stomach  is given  no food from the early morning  until the evening  so that its 
appetite  is aroused  and its desire grows stronger  and then it is fed with  
delicacies  and filled to the point of satiety,  its pleasure  would  increase,  and 
strength  would be doubled,  which should,  of course,  give rise to such of 
passions  as would  have remained  inactive  had it been  left on its custom  (beforeII It issaid


Page 454:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
fasting).  The spirit and the secret  of fasting  are to weaken  the powers  which  
Satan uses as his instruments  to turn men back to evil; and this will not be 
achieved  unless  one reduces  his food to the amount  of food which  he would  
have eaten  every  evening  if he were  not fasting.  But if he joins,  on breaking  his 
fast, the amount  of food which  he would  have eaten in the evening  to that 
which  he would  have eaten  during  the day time,  he would  reap no benefit  from  
his fast.
Indeed,  it is out of the proprieties  of fasting  that the person  should  not sleep  
much  during  the daytime  but rather  stay up so that he might  experience  the pangs  
of hunger  and the flames  of thirst  and become  conscious  of the weakness  of his 
powers,  with the result  that his heart  would  be cleansed  and purified.  He should  
maintain  his power  in such a state of weakness  every Night  so that it would  
become  easier  for him to perform  his supererogatory  night prayer  and read his 
devotional  recitals.  It is hoped  that Satan  will not hover  around  his heart  in order  
that he will be able to rise his sight  up to the dominion  of heaven.
In this context,  the Night  of Power  is the night  on which  something  of such  
dominion  is revealed  to man. It is also the night  referred  to by the saying  of Allah  
Almighty  when  He says: "Verily  We have sent it down  on the Night  of Power."  
(Al-Qadr  1)452
i <4 bj }
But it might  be veiled  from  him, who buries  his head deep  into a nose-bag  full 
of food,  and even from  him who keeps  his stomach  empty  from food,  unless  he 
frees his attention  from anything  else other than Allah Almighty.  This is the 
whole  matter,  the basis of which  is to reduce  the quantity  of food to induce  
moderation.  Allah Willing,  this will be explained  in more detail  in the Book  of 
Food.
The sixth  is to have his heart,  after  breaking  his fast, in the state of suspense,  
between  fear and hope, since he does not know  whether  his fasting  would  be 
accepted,  with the result that he would  be in the company  of the devotees  of 
Allah,  or it would  be returned  to him (with failure),  with the result  that he will be 
in the company  of these disliked  (by Allah  Almighty).  Let him adhere  to such a 
state at the conclusion  of every act of worship  from which he finishes.  It is 
narrated  that Al-Hassan  Ibn Abu Al-Hassan  Al-Basri  came upon a people  who  
were laughing,  thereupon  he said to them:  "No doubt,  Allah  Almighty  has made  
the month  of Ramadan  an arena  for His servants  to compete  one another  as in a 
race in His service;  and a people  have preceded  and won the race, and others  
remained  behind  and were lost. Surprising  and astonishing  is the one who is 
laughing  and indolent  on the very day on which  the active  have  won the race,  and 
the idle failed.  By Allah!  Were the veil to be removed,  surely,  the doer of good  
would  have been engaged  in his goodness,  and the doer of evil would  be also 
with his evil" (i.e. the pleasure  of such as whose  deed is accepted  by Allah  would


Page 455:
Book  six: the mysteries  of fasting
occupy  him from indolence,  whereas  the grief  and regret  of such as whose  deed  
is rejected  by Allah  would  close  the gate of laugh  and joy in his face).
It was said to Al-Ahnaf  Ibn Qais: "You are an old man, and fasting  weakens  
you." On that he said: "I prepare  myself  for a long journey;  and it is much  easier  
to keep  patient  on the service  of Allah  Almighty  than on His punishment."
Those  are the internal  meanings  of fasting.  But you might  say: "According  to 
the jurisprudents,  the fasting  is held valid for such as is satisfied  by restraining  the 
appetite  of both stomach  and private  parts,  and does not observe  those  internal  
meanings:  what  is the significance  of that?"
It should then be known  to you that the jurisprudents  of the outward  
aspects  of religious  service  deal only with the formal  requirements  by means  of 
proofs  far weaker  than those with which  we establish  its inward  conditions,  
particularly  those  of backbiting  and the like. But even, the jurisprudents  of the 
outward  aspects  of religious  service  are not to be interested  in any obligations  
other than those which  are within  the reach of the heedless  laymen  who are 
occupied  by the affairs  of this world.  But the learned  men of the hereafter  mean  
by validity  acceptance  and by acceptance  the attainment  of the intended  
purpose.  They  construe  the intended  purpose  of fasting  as to acquire  one of the 
Attributes  of Allah Almighty,  i.e. Self-Sufficiency  (it is not to eat nor to drink)  
as well as to follow  the example  of the angels  by refraining,  as much  as it couli  
be, from  bodily  lusts,  beyond  which  the angels  themselves  are deemed  far.
Man,  by nature,  ranks above  the animals  by virtue  of his ability  to overpower  
lusts through  the light of reason,  And after  the angels,  because  bodily  lusts prevail  
over him, and because  he is under the trial of resisting  them: the more he is 
involved  in lusts, the lower  he descends  and the closer  he comes  down  to the 
level of the animals.  The more he is able to suppress  his lusts the higher  he 
ascends  and the closer  he rises up to the level of the angels.  The angels  stand  
close  to the Presence  of Allah  Almighty,  and whoever  follows  their footsteps  and 
emulates  their example  come  like them  closer  to the Presence  of Allah  Almighty,  
since such as resembles  the close  in proximity  to the presence  is himself  close  in 
proximity  to the presence.  . But this closeness  is not achieved  by location  as it is 
by attributes.
If this is the mystery  of fasting  in the sight of those  of sound  minds  and pure  
hearts:  what  is then the significance  of delaying  a meal and joining  two meals  in 
the evening,  while  being  involved  in fulfilling  the other  physical  desires  during  the 
day? If there is any benefit  from that, there will be then no significance  for the 
statement  of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him":  
"Many  a man gets nothing  out of his fast except  hunger  and thirst."  For the same  
reason,  Abu Ad-Darda'  said: "How  good is the sleep and how excellent  is the 
eating  of the wise men; behold  how they put to shame  the sleeplessness  and the 
fasting  of the foolish."
Verily  an atom's  weight  of the worship  of the righteous  and pious,  endued453


Page 456:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
with certainty  of faith is much better and even heavier  than as much as 
mountains  of worship  of those  who are misguided  and misled.  For this reason,  
one of the learned  men said: "Many  a person  who seems  fasting  even though  he 
is really  not fasting,  whereas  many  a person  who is not fasting  even though  he is 
really  fasting."  Such as seems  not fasting,  even though  he is really  fasting  is him,  
who restrains  the parts  of his body  from  doing  what  is sinful,  even though  he eats 
and drinks.  Such as seems  fasting,  even though  he is not really  fasting  is he, who  
suffers  the bangs of hunger  and the flames  of thirst,  but does not restrain  the 
parts  of his body  from  committing  sins.
If one understands  the real significance  and mystery  of fasting,  he comes  to 
know that the example  of such as refrains  from eating,  drinking,  and having  
sexual  intercourse,  even though  he breaks  fast through  indulgence  in sins is like 
the example  of him, who passes  his wet hand over the parts of ablution  in his 
body  thrice:  in fact, he outwardly  agrees  with the required  number,  but inwardly  
leaves  what  is more  important,  i.e. the washing  of the parts of the body,  with the 
result that his prayer will be rejected  and returned  to him because  of his 
ignorance.  The example  of him who breaks  fast through  eating  and drinking,  but 
at the same time, restrains  the parts of his body  from doing  what is shameful  is 
like the example  of him who washes  the parts of ablution  in his body  once each,  
with the result  that his prayer  will be accepted  from him, Allah  Willing,  because  
he has fulfilled  what  is fundamental,  even though  not what  is supplementary.  But 
he who does both  is like the person  who,  in performing  the ablution,  washes  each  
member  of his body  thrice,  thereby  fulfilling  what  is fundamental  as well as what  
is supplementary,  which  constitutes  perfection.  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon him" once said: "Verily  fasting  is a trust; let each,  
therefore,  take good  care of his trust."  When  he recited:  "Verily  Allah  commands  
you to give back  the trusts  to their  real owners"  (An-Nisa  58)
i o' oj * }
He raised  his hands on his ears and eyes and said: "Verily,  the hearing  is a 
trust! Verily,  the sight is a trust (which  its possessor  should  safeguard)."  Had it 
not been from amongst  the trusts  which  belong  to fasting,  surely,  the Messenger  
of Allah  "Allah 's blessing  and peace  be upon  him" would  have  not said: "Let him 
(the fasting  person)  say (when  anyone  quarrels  with him): 'I'm fasting'"  i.e. I've 
kept my tongue  as a trust and should  safeguard  it (against  any kind of evil): how  
should  then I give it free rein in retort  to your  quarrel?
It has been  obvious  then that every  act of worship  has outward  aspects  as well  
as inward  mysteries,  an external  husk as well as an internal  bith, and the external  
husk consists  of many  grades,  each contains  various  layers:  it is then up to you to 
choose,  whether  to be satisfied  by the external  husk and not the internal  bith, or 
to join the company  of those  endued  with sound  minds.454


Page 457:
Book  six: the mysteries  of fasting 455
CHAPTER  THREE:  ON THE VOLUNTARY  FASTS  AND THE  
ARRANGEMENT  OF REGULAR  DIVISIONS  THEREIN
It should  be known  that fasting  is desirable  on the excellent  days, some of 
which  occur  every  year, others  every  month  and others  every  week.  As to those  
which  occur  every  year, after the month  of Ramadan,  a mention  might  be made  
of the day of Arafah  (ninth of Dhul-Hijjah),  the day of Ashura'  (tenth of 
Muharram),  the first ten of Dhul-Hijjah,  the first ten of Muharram,  in addition  
to all of the four Sacred  months,  in which  fasting  is desirable  on any day, since  
they all are excellent.  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon him" used to observe  so much fasts in the month  of Sha'ban,  to the 
extent  that he was thought  as if he were in the month  of Ramadan  (for he 
hardly  left a day without  fasting).  According  to a certain  narration:  "The best  
fasts to be observed,  after those  of Ramadan,  are those  of Allah's  Sacred  month  
of Muharram."
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "To 
observe  only a fast from any of the Sacred  month  is more excellent  than thirty  
fasts from any month  else, whereas  to observe  only a day from Ramadan  is more  
excellent  than thirty  fasts from  any of the Sacred  months."  According  to a certain  
tradition:  "He, who observes  three fasts from any of the Sacred  month,  namely  
Thursday,  Friday  and Saturday,  Allah  Almighty  writes  for him, by each day, the 
(reward  of the) religious  service  of nine hundred  years."  According  to anothei  
narration:  "When  it is the middle  of Sha'ban,  no fasts should  be observed  until  
the coming  of (the month  of) Ramadan."  For this reason,  it is desirable  to leave  
fasting  many  days before  the coming  of Ramadan,  even though  it is permissible  
to continue  fasts of Sha'ban  unto Ramadan.  However,  the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" did so once,  but made  a break  of fasts  
to separate  between  both so many times. It is impermissible  to receive  (the 
month  of) Ramadan  with the fast of two or three days in advance,  unless  it 
corresponds  to one's  devotional  fasts. On the other  hand,  it was disliked  by many  
companions  to observe  fasts for the whole  of Rajab,  in order  not to be equal  to 
the month  of Ramadan.
The excellent  months  then are Dhul-Hijjah,  Muharram,  Rajab and Sha'ban,  
whereas  the Sacred  months  are Dhul-Qa'dah,  Dhul-Hijjah,  Muharram  and Rajab,  
one of which (i.e. Rajab) comes separately,  and the remaining  three come  
consecutively.  But the most  excellent  of them  all is Dhul-Hijjah,  for therein  Hajj 
lies, in addition  to the well-known  and the numbered  days. Dhul-Qa'dah  also is 
one of the Sacred  months,  and it is of the months  of Hajj. Shawwal  is one of the 
months  of Hajj,  even though  it is not of the Sacred  months.  Both  Muharram  and 
Rajab  are not of the months  of Hajj (although  they are of the Sacred  months).  It 
is narrated  (on the authority  of Ibn Abbas  " Allah  be pleased  with both"  that)  
The Prophet  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "There  are no 
good  deeds,  preferably  better  than those  done  on the (first)  ten days of Dhul-


Page 458:
456 The quarter  of the acts of worship
Hijjah,  the fast of any day of which  is equal  (in reward)  to the fasts of a whole  
year, and standing  for night  supererogatory  prayer  on any night  of which  is 
equal  (in reward)  to standing  for night  supererogatory  prayers  on the night  of 
Power."  It was said: "Not even Jihad in Allah's  Cause?"  He replied:  "Not  
even  Jihad  in Allah's  Cause,  unless  man (who  gets out for Jihad falls martyr,  
with)  his steed  hamstrung,  and his blood  shed."
As for those  days which  occur  every  month,  a mention  might  be made  of 
the first, the middle  and the last of the month.  In the middle  of the month,  
there  lie the white  days (on which  the moon  is perfect),  i.e. the thirteenth,  the 
fourteenth,  and the fifteenth.
As for the days which  occur  every  week, a mention  might  be made of 
Monday,  Thursday,  and Friday.  Those  are the excellent  days, on which  it is 
more desirable  to observe  fast and do good deeds,  perchance  their reward  
might  be multiplied,  by virtue  of the blessing  of those  times.
As for the perpetual  lifetime  fasting,  it is all-inclusive  of that and more  
beyond  it; and the mystics  adopt  many  ways of practicing  it. It is disliked  by 
some,  for there are many  narrations  which  attest  its being  undesirable.  The  
truth of the matter  is that there are two causes  which  lie behind  disliking  it: 
one is that such does not break  fasting  on the days of both Ids, in addition  to 
the days of Tashriq  (from  11th to 13th of Dhul-Hijjah),  since it is a perpetual  
lifetime  fasting.  The other  is that he refrains  from the right way of sunnah  
pertaining  to the breaking  of fast, restraining  himself  only to fasting,  although  
Allah  Almighty  likes that His concessions  be observed  as well as He likes that  
His obligations  be fulfilled.  If there  is no fear of anything  of both,  and rather  
one thinks that doing so is for his welfare,  let him do it, since many  
companions  and followers  did so. the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" said, according  to a narration  on the authority  of Abu Musa  
Al-Ash'ari:  "He,  who observes  perpetual  lifetime  fasts,  the Hell will be constricted  
in such a way that (there  will be no place  in it) for him, and he will (be doomed  
to) have  a long  life of ninety  (years)."
There  stands  second  to that in rank the fasting  of half the time, i.e. to 
observe  fasts on alternate  days, to fast a day and leave fasting  on the other  
day. This is more  harder  and more  effective  to overpower  the soul. There  are 
so many  narrations  in support  of its excellence,  for the servant  who practices  
it is in the state of suspense  between  fasting  a day and giving  thanks  to Allah  
Almighty  on the other  day. the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon  him" said: "The keys of the coffers  of this world  and of the treasures  of 
the earth have been offered  to me (to receive),  thereupon  I rejected  them and 
said: "Let me become  hungry  a day and satisfied  another  day, in order that I 
should  praise  You whenever  I have been satisfied,  and invoke  You whenever  I 
have been hungry."  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" further  said: "The best fasts are those of my brother  (the Prophet)  David,


Page 459:
Book  six: the mysteries  of fasting  
who used to fast on alternate  days, i.e. to fast a day, and leave fasting  on the 
other."  According  to his argumentation  with Abdullah  Ibn Amr concerning  fast, 
in which  Abdullah  said: "I have power  to observe  more fasts" thereupon  the 
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said to him: "Fast  a 
day, and leave fasting  on the other."  He said: "But I have power  to observe  more  
fasts." the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said:  
"Nothing  more is better  than that." It is narrated  that the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" never observed  fasts for a whole  
month  other than Ramadan,  for he used to leave fasting  for some days in any 
month  else other  than Ramadan.
But he, who has no power  to fast half the time,  let him then fast one-third  the 
time, i.e. to fast a day and leave fasting  for two days. This third might  also be 
fulfilled  if one observes  three fasts in the beginning  of the month,  another  three  
in its middle,  and further  three  in its last, and in this way, his fasts will agree  with  
the excellent  times.  If one observes  fast every  Monday,  Thursday  and Friday,  he 
will fulfill  what  is close  to the third.
Now,  since the excellent  times  in which  fasting  is more  desirable  have become  
clear, it is out of perfection  that man should  understand  well the significance  of 
fasting,  and that its purpose  is to purify the heart, and devote  the attention  
entirely  to Allah  Almighty.  Such as is well-aware  of the niceties  and subdeties  o 
the inward  should consider  his states: somerimes,  his state requires  him to 
observe  fasts perpetually,  and sometimes  his state requires  him to leave fasting  
perpetually,  and sometimes  his state requires  him to combine  both fasting  and 
leaving  fast. If he understands  the real significance,  and is certain  of its place  and 
value  on the way to the hereafter,  through  watching  the heart,  the interest  of his 
heart  will not be then concealed  from him; and this does not require  an unbroken  
routine.
For this reason,  it is narrated  that the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" sometimes  observed  fasts for many  days consecutively  that it 
would  be said that he would  not break  his fast, and sometimes  he left fasting  for 
many days consecutively  that it would be said that he would not fast. 
Furthermore,  sometimes  he slept (and did not stand for night prayer)  for many  
nights  consecutively  that it would be said that he would not stand (for night  
prayer),  and sometimes  he kept standing  (for night prayer) for many nights  
consecutively  that it would be said that he would not sleep. In so doing,  he 
followed  what  was revealed  to him, by virtue  of the light of Prophethood,  of the 
appropriate  behaviour  respective  to every  time.
Many  learned  men dislike  that one should  take a break  of more  than four days  
between  each fast, depending  upon the (period  in which  one should  leave fast 
beginning  from the) Id day, in addition  to the three  days of Tashriq,  arguing  that457


Page 460:
r m
II
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
this might  harden  the heart,  give rise to bad manners  and customs,  and open the 
gate of lusts and desires;  and by my life, this is true to most of the people,  
particularly  those  whose  habit  is to eat twice  each day and night.458
This is what we like to mention  pertaining  of the routine  of the voluntary  
fasts;  and Allah  Almighty  knows  the truth  best.i
i
;


Page 461:
Hal
In the Name  of Allah,  Most  Gracious,  Most  Merciful.
Praise be to Allah, Who has made the word of monotheism  a means of 
protection  and bulwark  (for His servants),  and the Ancient  House  a place of 
assembly  for men and a place of safety,  and exalted  it in relation  to Himself,  by 
way of honouring,  protecting  and bestowing  his favour  upon  it, and made  visiting  
and performing  circumambulation  round  it act as a veil and shield  to protect  the 
servant  (who does that) from the punishment;  and Allah's  blessing  and peace  in 
abundance  and plenty  be upon  Muhammad,  the Prophet  of mercy,  and the chief  
and master  of this nation,  as well as upon  his family  and companions.  He told the 
truth,  therewith  he became  the chief  of the creatures.
To go further:  it is a well-known  fact that the greater  pilgrimage  (Hajj)  is one of 
the fundamental  principles  of Islam:  it is the lifetime  worship,  the conclusion  of the 
commands  (and orders  of Allah  Almighty),  the perfection  of faith in Islam,  and the 
completion  of religion.  In connection  with it, Allah Almighty  revealed:  " This day 
have I perfected  your religion  for you, completed  My favour  upon you, and have  
chosen  for you Islam  as your  religion."  (Al-Ma'idah  3)
Pertaining  to it, the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" said (according  to the narration  of Ibn Abd on the authority  of Abu  
Hurairah):  "He, who dies without  performing  Hajj (even though  he has the 
power  and ability  to do it, his Islam  will have not complete,  and then it is the 
same to him) to die as a Jew if he so likes, or as a Christian  if he so likes."  How  
exalted  then is a religious  service,  with  whose  absence  the perfection  of religion  is 
lost, and such as does not perform  it goes astray,  alike both  Jews and Christians;  
and it is more  fitting  that attention  should  be turned  to explain  it and give details  
to its pillars,  rules,  proprieties,  good merits  and mysteries;  and all of this might  be 
disclosed,  Allah  Willing,  under  three  sections:
The first chapter  pertains  to the good merits  of the greater  pilgrimage  (Hajj),  
the excellence  of Mecca and the Ancient  House,  as well as the pillars and 
conditions  of its obligation.  The second  chapter  deals with its outward  works  in 
order,  beginning  from setting  out on journey  (to perform  Hajj) ending  with the 
return.  The third chapter  discusses  its fine proprieties,  and abstruse  mysteries,  
and inward  works.  Now,  let's begin  with the first chapter.
459


Page 462:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 460
CHAPTER  ONE:  ON THE GOOD  MERITS  OF THE GREATER  PILGRIMAGE  
(HAJJ),  THE EXCELLENCE  OF MECCA  AND  THE ANCIENT  HOUSE,  AND  
THE PILLARS  AND CONDITIONS  OF ITS OBLIGATION.
This  chapter  includes  two parts:
PART  ONE:
the excellence  of the greater  pilgrimage  (Haft),  
the superiority  of the House
And the good merits of both Mecca  and Medina  "Might  Allah safeguard  
them",  and making  the journeys  to the mosques
The Excellence  Of The Greater  Pilgrimage  (Hajj).
Allah  Almighty  says in this respect:  "And  proclaim  the Pilgrimage  among  men;  
they will come  to you on foot and (mounted)  on every  kind of camel,  lean on 
account  of journeys  through  deep  and distant  mountain  highways."  (Al-Hajj  27)4 g® JS"o?  ^il.  ^uT  4
According  to Qatadah:  When  Allah Almighty  commanded  Abraham  "Peace  
be upon him as well as upon our Prophet  (Muhammad)  and every  well-chosen  
servant"  to proclaim  Hajj among  men,  he called  publicly:  "O people!  Verily,  Allah  
Almighty  ahs constructed  a House  (on earth):  so, you should  come  to visit it and 
do the ceremonies  of pilgrimage  in it!" Allah  Almighty  resumed:  "That  they may  
witness  the benefits  (provided)  for them"  (Al-Hajj  28)
Which  some  people  construe  as to practice  trade and traffic  in the season,  and 
receive  the reward  in the hereafter.  When  one of the early men heard  that he said:  
"Might  Allah forgive  them, by the Lord of the Ka'bah!"  in comment  on the 
statement  of Allah: " He (Satan)  said: "Because  You have thrown  me out of the 
Way,  lo! I will lie in wait for them  on Your  Straight  Way"  (Al-A'raf  16)
It refers to the way to Mecca,  on which  Satan  lies in wait for the people  in 
order  to prevent  them  from  reaching  it (and performing  Hajj).
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said 
(according  to the narration  of both Sahihs  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah):  
"He, who performs  Hajj (and visits)  the House,  in which  he neither  speaks  with  
obscenity,  nor commits  injustice,  will come free from his sins as he was on the 
very  way his mother  gave birth to him." the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon  him" further  said (according  to the narration  of Malik  on the 
authority  of Talhah  Ibn Abdullah):  "Satan  is never  seen on a day, more trivial,  
more despised,  more scorned,  and more vexed  than he is on the day of Arafah  
(i.e. the ninth day of Dhul-Hijjah,  on which  standing  in Arafah  constitutes  the 
fundamental  pillar  of Hajj)."  This is only because  of the great  mercy  which  Allah40f^


Page 463:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage
Almighty  sends  upon  His servants  in abundance,  and the prolific  number  of great  
sins which  Allah  Almighty  plots of His servants,  depending  upon the statement  
that "from  amongst  the sins, there  are such grave  as nothing  plots out other  than  
the stay on the day of Arafah."
It is narrated  from one of the inspired  men that Iblis "Allah's  Curse  be upon  
him" appeared  to him at Arafah  in a form of a person  of lean body, pale face,  
tearful  eyes and broken  back. He asked  him: "What  has caused  your eyes to be 
tearful  as such?" he said: "I weep because  the people  set out with the sole 
intention  to perform  Hajj with no purpose  of practicing  traffic,  thereupon  I say 
(to myself)  that they aim at it only, I feel afraid  they might  not be disappointed;  
and this is what has caused  my eyes to be tearful."  He asked him: "Then,  what  
has caused  your body  to become  lean?"  he said: "Because  of the horses'  neighing  
in the Cause  of Allah,  and had it been for my cause,  it would  have been more  
joyful  to me." He asked  him: "Then,  what has caused  you to turn pale as such?"  
he said: "The group's  co-operation  in obedience  (of Allah),  and had they co­
operated  in disobedience  (of Allah)  it would  have been dearer  to me." He asked  
him: "Then,  what  has broken  your back?"  he said: "It is the saying  of the servant:  
"O Allah! I ask you the good conclusion  (of my deeds)",  thereupon  I say (to 
myself):  "Woe to me! When  should  this (servant)  be proud  of his deed? I feel 
afraid  he might  have made  sense  to that."
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" sait 
(according  to the narration  of Al-Baihaqi  and Ad-Daraqatni  on the authority  of 
both Abu Hurairah  and A'ishah):  "He, who sets out of his house  with the sole 
intention  to perform  Hajj or Umrah,  and he dies (on the way), the reward  of a 
performer  of Hajj and Umrah will be assigned  to him until the Day of 
Judgement;  and he, who dies in any of both Sanctuaries  (i.e. the Sacred  House  of 
Mecca,  and the Prophet's  mosque  of Medina),  will not be displayed  nor called  to 
account,  and rather  it will be said to him: 'Enter  the Garden  (with peace)!'."  the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said (according  to 
both Sahihs  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah):  "The  performance  of Hajj that is 
accepted  (by Allah Almighty,  and this requires  both conditions  of sincerity  and 
conformity  with the law) is much better than this world and all of what it 
contains;  and the Hajj which  is accepted  (by Allah  Almighty)  has no reward  but 
the Garden."
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said 
(according  to both  Sahihs  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah):  "The  performers  of 
both Hajj and Umrah  are Allah's  delegates  and visitors:  if they ask Him, He will 
give them,  and if they ask for His Forgiveness,  He will forgive  for them,  and if 
they invoke  Him He will respond  to their invocation,  and if they intercede  (for 
the people)  He will accept  their intercession."  According  to another  tradition  
(narrated  by Al-Khatib  on the authority  of Ibn Umar) transmitted  from the 
family  of the Prophet:  "Such  as has the greatest  sin is he, who stands  at Arafah,461


Page 464:
4*2 The quarter  of the acts of worship
tt wHI not forgive  for him."
It is J both Ibn Habban  and Al-Baihaqi)  on the authorin'  of Ibn 
the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him"  
"Everyday.  one hundred  and nventy  parts of mercy  descend  upon  
House, sixty of which are assigned  to the performers  of 
anon, tony to the performers  of prayer, and twenty to theIf;
Abbas  fro: 
that ne sa_'. 
this Sacn
beholders."  According  to another  tradition  (transmitted  by Ibn Hibban  and Al- 
Hzirim  on the authority  of Ibn Umar):  "Perform  circumambulation  round this 
House  so much,  for this is the most  glorious  thing  you will find in your scrolls  on 
the Day of Judgement,  and the greatest  deed because  of which you will be 
envied."  For this reason,  it is desirable  to circumambulate  the House  at the arrival
(to Mecca'  even  before  beginning  the ceremonies  of Hajj and Umrah.
According  to (an unidentified)  narration:  "He, who circumambulates  the 
House  for a week as barefooted  and bareheaded,  will (receive  reward  equal to 
that of) emancipation  of a slave;  and he, who circumambulates  the House  while  it 
is rainy  for a week  his previous  sins will be forgiven  for him."  It is said that when  
Allah  Almighty  forgives  a sin for anyone  in the standing  place  of Arafah,  He will 
forgive  the same sin for whomever  he touches  in that standing  place.  According  
to a righteous  early man: "If the day of Arafah  happens  to be Friday,  it will be 
forgiven  for all the people  of Arafah;  and it is the best day in this world,  on which  
the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" performed  the 
Farewell  Hajj, and he was standing  (at Arafah)  when the following  Holy  
statement  of Allah Almighty  was revealed:  " This day have I perfected  your  
religion  for you, completed  My favour  upon  you, and have chosen  for you Islam  
as your  religion."  (Al-Ma'idah  3)
© L-o y i 13 oJL<£ i ^
(According  to the narration  of both sheikhs  on the authority  of Umar)  the 
people  of Scripture  said: "Had  this Holy Verse  been revealed  unto us, surely,  we 
would  have taken  the very day on which  it was revealed  as a festival  day." On that 
Umar  "Allah  be pleased  with him" said: "J bear witness  to the fact that this Holy  
Verse  was revealed  upon the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon him" while he was standing  at Arafah  on a day on which  there were two 
festivals  (for the Muslims):  it was the day of (standing  at) Arafah,  and it was also 
Friday  (which  the Muslims  sanctify;."
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said 
(according  to the narration  of AI-Hakim  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah):  "O 
Allah! Forgive  for the pilgrim,  and for such as for whom  the pilgrim  asks for 
forgiveness!"  it is narrated  that Ali Ibn Al-Muwaffaq  performed  Hajj on behalf  of 
the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him".  He said: I saw 
the Messenger  of Allah "Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him" in a dream,  and 
he asked  me: "O Ibn Al-Muwaffaq!  Have you performed  Hajj on my behalf?"  I


Page 465:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage  
answered  in the affirmative,  he further  asked:  "Have  you recited  Talbiyah  on my 
behalf?"  I answered  in the affirmative,  thereupon  he said: "Then,  I will reward  
you for it on the Day of Judgement:  I will take hold of your hand  in the standing  
place  and admit  you to the Garden  while  the people  will be amidst  the disaster  of 
reckoning."
According  to Mujahid  and other learned  men: When the pilgrims  arrive in 
Mecca,  they are kindly  received  by angels:  those  angels  pay salutation  to the riders  
of camels,  shake hands with the riders of donkeys,  and embrace  the walkers.  
According  to Al-Hassan:  "He, who dies just after (the conclusion  of the month  
of) Ramadan,  or after fighting  (in Allah's  Cause),  or after performing  Hajj will 
have died as a martyr."  According  to Umar:  "It will be forgiven  for the pilgrim,  as 
well as for whomever  he asks for forgiveness  during  the months  of Dhul-Hijjah,  
Muharram,  Safar,  and the first twenty  days of Rabie  the First. It was the practice  
of the early righteous  men to send off the fighters  (in Allah's  Cause)  and receive  
kindly  the pilgrims  and kiss them in between  their eyes, and ask them to invoke  
good  upon them;  and they used to hasten  to do so before  those  (pilgrims)  would  
be contaminated  with sins.
It is narrated  that Ali Ibn Al-Muwaffaq  said: I performed  Hajj one year, and 
when  it was the night  prior  to the day of Arafah,  I slept  at Mina  in the mosque  of 
Khaif,  and behold!  In a dream  I saw as if there were two angels  wearing  green  
garments  descended  upon me from the heaven,  one of whom called his 
companions:  "O slave of Allah!"  the other  replied:  "I'm here responding  to you 
call O slave of Allah!"  he asked him: "Do you know  how many  persons  have  
performed  Hajj (and visited)  the House  of our Lord Almighty  this year?" he 
answered  in the negative,  thereupon  he said: "This year, six hundred  thousand  
persons  have performed  Hajj (and visited)  the House  of our Lord Almighty.  But 
do you know  how many  persons  from  whom  He Almighty  have accepted  Hajj?"  
he answered  in the negative,  thereupon  he said: "He has accepted  Hajj only from  
six persons."  Then,  both rose up in the air and disappeared  from my sight.  I was 
scared  and given  to severe  anxiety,  and became  concerned  with myself.  I said: "If 
He Almighty  has accepted  Hajj only from six persons,  what should  my position  
be from those six?" when I poured  down from Arafat,  I stood at the Sacred  
Monument,  and went on reflecting  the multitudes  of people (who have  
performed  Hajj) and the very little number  from  whom  it has been accepted,  and 
I was overpowered  by slumber,  and behold!  The two persons  descended  once  
again in the same form in which  they had appeared,  and one of them called  the 
other,  and both repeated  the speech  of the first time, with the addition  that the 
former  said to the other:  "Do you know  what  judgement  our Lord Almighty  has 
passed tonight  (concerning  those who have performed  Hajj this year)?" he 
answered  in the negative,  thereupon  he said: "He has granted  to each one of the 
six (from  whom  He accepted  Hajj) one hundred  thousand  (to intercede  for)." I 
woke  up with pleasure  that was beyond  description.463


Page 466:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
It is further  narrated  from him that he said: I performed  Hajj one year, and 
when  I finished  from all of my ceremonies,  I thought  of those  whose  Hajj might  
not be accepted  (by Allah Almighty),  and said: "O Lord! I've granted  my Hajj,  
and assigned  its reward  to such as whose  Hajj You have not accepted."  In my 
dream,  I saw the Lord Almighty  "Exalted  be He" Who said to me: "O Ali! Do 
you show generosity  to Me, even though  it is I Who has created  generosity  as 
well as the generous,  and I'm the most Bounteous  and the most Munificent  of 
those  who are bounteous  and munificent,  and I'm most  fitting  for generosity  and 
bounty  of all the (creatures  in the) worlds?  I've granted  such as whose  Hajj I have  
not accepted  to him whose  Hajj I've accepted  (to intercede  for him and his 
intercession  will be accepted)."464
The Merit  Of The House  And Mecca
the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said 
(according  to an unidentified  narration):  "Allah Almighty  has promised  this 
House  to have (no less than) six hundred  pilgrims  yearly,  and if they are short  (in 
any year) Allah Almighty  completes  the number  from amongst  the angels."  
However,  the Ka'bah  will be mustered  in a form of a bridegroom  in a procession,  
with its visitors  hanging  in its curtains,  seeking  round  until it will be admitted  to 
the Garden,  thereupon  they will be admitted  in its company.  According  to a 
certain  narration  (by both At-Tirmidhi  and An-Nasa'i  on the authority  of Ibn 
Abbas):  "The Black  Stone  is one of the pearls  of the Garden,  and on the Day of 
Judgement,  it will be raised  with two eyes and a tongue  to speak  therewith,  and it 
will bear witness  to such as pointed  to it (while  circumambulating  the Ka'bah)  
with truth  and sincerity."
However,  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him"  
used to kiss it so much (according  to the narration  of both Sheikhs  on the 
authority  of Umar).  It is further  narrated  (by Al-Bazzar  and Ai-Hakim  on the 
authority  of Umar)  that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon him" prostrated  on it, and when  he was circumambulating  the House  on a 
riding  mount,  he placed  the bent-headed  stick on it and then kissed  the edge of 
the bent-headed  stick. (According  to the narration  of Al-Hakim)  Umar  kissed  it 
and said: "I surely  know  that you are but a stone,  which  could  neither  benefit  nor 
cause harm, and had I not seen the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace be upon him" kissing  you, I would  not have kissed  you." He went on 
weeping  until his moaning  became  high. He turned  to his back  and behold!  There  
was Ali (Ibn Abu Talib)  to whom  he said: "O Abu Al-Hassan!  Here tears should  
be shed, and invocations  should  receive  answer."  Ali said: "O Commander  of 
Believers!  Of a surety  this (stone)  benefits  as well as it causes  harm."  He asked:  
"Why  is that?"  he said: "When  Allah  Almighty  took covenant  from the offspring  
(of Adam)  He wrote  a document  (to affirm  that) which  he placed  in that Stone,  
thereupon  it bears witness  to the loyalty  of the faithful  believer,  and to the 
ungratefulness  to the infidel."  It is said: This is the significance  which  lies behind


Page 467:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage  
the people's  statement  on their  pointing  to the Black  Stone:  "O Allah!  It is out of 
faith in You, trust in Your Book,  and loyalty  to Your Pledge  (I perform  this 
duty)."
It is narrated  on the authority  of AJ-Hassan  that a single  fast to be observed  
in it (Mecca)  is equal  (in its reward)  to one hundred  thousand  fasts, and a single  
Dirham  to be given  in charity  in it is equal  (in reward)  to one hundred  thousand  
Dirhams;  and the same is true of any good deed in it which  is equal to one 
hundred  thousand  good deeds.  It is also said that seven  circumambulations  are 
equal  to one Umrah,  and three Umrahs  are equal  to one Hajj. According  to the 
narration  (of Muslim  and Al-Hakim  on the authority  of Ibn Abbas):  "An 
Umrah  to be performed  in Ramadan  is equal (in reward)  to a Hajj to be 
performed  with me" (even  though  it does not cancel  out the obligation  of Hajj).
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said 
(according  to both At-Tirmidhi  and Al-Hakim  on the authority  of Ibn Umar):  "I 
will be the first of whom  the earth  will split open,  and I will go to the people  of 
Baqi'  who will be mustered  in my company,  and then I will go to those  of Mecca,  
whereupon  I will be mustered  in between  both Sanctuaries  (of Mecca  and 
Medina)."  According  to the narration  (of Al-Mufaddal  Al-Ja'di  on the authority  of 
Ibn Abbas):  "When  Adam  "Peace  be upon  him" finished  from  his ceremonies  (of 
Hajj) the angels  received  him kindly  and said: "Your  Hajj has been accepted  (by 
Allah) O Adam.  We performed  Hajj to this House  two thousand  years before  
you."  According  to a certain  tradition:  "Allah  Almighty  casts  glance  of the people  
of the earth every night, and the first at whom  He looks are those of the 
Sanctuary,  and the first of those  of Sanctuary  at whom  He looks  are the people  of 
the Sacred  Mosque:  He forgives  for such as He sees circumambulating  the 
House,  such as He sees offering  prayer,  and such as He sees standing  with his 
face towards  the Ka'bah.
One of the saints,  to whom  the mysteries  have been revealed,  said: "I saw all 
the harbours  prostrating  to Abdan,  and I saw Abdan  prostrating  to Jeddah."  It is 
said that the sun will not set on any day until one of the 'Abdal  (substitutes)  has 
performed  the circumambulation  and that the dawn  will not break  forth  after any 
night until one of the Awtad  has performed  it; if this daily habit) comes  to an 
end, it would  cause [the Ka'bah]  to be removed  from the earth,  so that people  
would  awaken  to find that the Ka'bah  had vanished  and would  find no trace  of it. 
The same  will happen  if seven  years  pass without  anyone  having  performed  Hajj,  
and the Qur'an  will be removed  from the Mushafs,  and when morning  comes  
upon  the people,  the papers  would  be white  and glittering  with no single  letter  on 
it; and then the Qur'an  would  be erased  from hearts  and no word  of it would  be 
remembered;  and the people  would  return  to the poetry,  songs,  and tales of the 
pre-Islamic  period  of ignorance.  Then the Anti-Christ  would  appear  and Jesus  
"Peace  be upon him" would  come to kill him. When  all this occurs  The hour465


Page 468:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
would  be like the pregnant  woman  in travail,  waiting  for the moment  of her 
delivery.
According  to a certain  narration  (by Al-Bazzar,  Ibn Hibban  and Al-Hakim  on 
the authority  of Ibn Umar):  "Perform  circumambulation  round  this House  so 
much  before  it would  be lifted,  for indeed  it was ruined  twice earlier,  and in the 
third time, it would  be lifted."  It is related  (even though  it is an unidentified  
narration)  on the authority  of Ali that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah ’s blessing  
and peace  be upon  him" said: Allah  said: "When  I like to ruin this world,  I shall  
begin  by demolishing  My House,  and then I shall ruin the world  after  it."
The Excellence  Of Living  In Mecca  "Might  Allah  Safeguard  It"
And why the people  dislike  that
The fearful  cautious  among  the learned  men dislike  the living  in Mecca  for 
three  reasons:
The first is the fear of boredom  and the automated  dullness  of feeling  
towards  it, which  might  cool down  the heat of affection  for it. For this reason,  
Umar  used to beat the pilgrims  once they finished  their ceremonies  and say: 
"O people  of Yemen!  Go back to your (homeland  of) Yemen!  O people  of 
Sham!  Return  back to your (homeland  of) Sham!  O people  of Iraq! Go back  
to your (homeland  of) Iraq!" for the same reason  too, Umar intended  to 
prevent  the people  from performing  circumambuladons  round  the House  so 
much saying:  "I feel afraid this would  make dull the feeling  of the people  
towards  the House."
The second  is to stimulate  longing  for the House  by leaving  it, which  would  
give rise to the motifs  of returning  to it once again.  Allah  Almighty  has made  the 
House  a resort  of assembly  for men and a place of safety,  to which  they return  
again and again after leaving  it, without  being able to satisfying  their desire.  
According  to a good  man: "It is much  better  to live in a certain  town,  with your  
heart  longing  to Mecca  and attached  to the House  than to live near it, while  bore  
of remaining  there,  with your heart  attached  to another  town."  According  to one 
of the ancient  learned  men: "How  many  a man living  in Khurasan  who is closer  
(in love) to this House than such as performs  circumambulation  round it 
(routinely)."  It is said that Allah  Almighty  has servants,  round  whom  the Ka'bah  
circumambulates,  in order  to draw  near  unto (the Presence  of) Allah  Almighty.
The third is the fear of committing  sins and mistakes  therein,  for this is, 
indeed,  very dangerous,  and incurs  upon  such as does it the wrath  and anger  of 
Allah  Almighty,  in view of the honour  of the place.  In this respect,  it is narrated  
from Wuhaib  Ibn Al-Ward  Al-Makki  that he said: One night, I was offering  
prayer  near Al-Hijr  when I heard a speech  in between  the Ka'bah  and the 
curtains,  saying:  "To You O Allah  I complain,  and then to you O Gabriel,  what  I 
suffer  from the performers  of circumambulation  round  me, of their  inclination  to 
talk and falsity  and falsity!  If they do not desist from that, I will shake off so 
much strongly  that each stone of mine will return  to the same mountain  from466


Page 469:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage  
which  it was cut off."
According  to Ibn Mas'ud  "Allah  be pleased  with him": "There  is no town,  in 
which  one is blamed  even for his intention  before  bringing  it into act other  than  
Mecca."  Then he recited the statement  of Allah Almighty:  "and any whose  
purpose  therein  is profanity  or wrong-doing,  them will We cause to taste of a 
most  grievous  Penalty."  (Al-Hajj  25)
JiSvlaJl  4jjl tjS' o! ^
Consider  here that he reckons  them  only for the purpose.  It is said that as well 
as the good deeds are multiplied  therein,  the bad deeds also are multiplied.  
According  to Ibn Abbas  "Allah  be pleased  with both":  "Practicing  monopoly  in 
Mecca  is a part of profanity  in the Sanctuary."  The same  is true also of telling  lies. 
According  to Ibn Abbas  once  again:  "To commit  even as many  as seventy  sins in 
(any place such as) Rakyah  (a place between  Mecca  and Ta'if) is much  dearer  to 
me than to commit  even  a single  sin in Mecca."
This fear led some of those who were living in Mecca  to refrain from  
answering  the call of nature  within  the borders  of the Sanctuary,  and rather  to 
get outside  its boundaries  in order  to fulfill  their needs.  One of them stayed  in 
Mecca  for a month  during  which he did not place his side on the ground.  
Because  of preventing  (others)  from  living  in Mecca,  some  learned  men disliked  
the renting  of the homes  of Mecca.  But think not that the dislike  of stay in 
Mecca  contradicts  the superiority  of the place,  for indeed,  this dislike  refers to 
the people's  weakness  and shortage  of undertaking  the right of the place (as it 
should  be).
The significance  of our statement  that leaving  the stay in it is better  should  be 
restricted  to the stay with indulgence  and tedium.  But how far it is to be better  
than the stay with loyalty  and fulfillment  of the right  of the place  (as it should  be); 
and why not seeing  that when The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon him" returned  to Mecca  (after  the conquest)  he faced the Ka'bah  
and said (according  to the narration  of At-Tirmidhi,  Ibn Majah  and An-Nasa'i  
according  to Abdullah  Ibn Adi Ibn Al-Hamra'):  "Verily,  you are the best of 
Allah's  lands  and the dearest  of Allah's  cities  to me; and had I not been  driven  out 
from you, I would  not have left you." And why not also seeing  that looking  at it 
is a religious  service,  and that the good deeds therein  are multiplied  as we have  
seen earlier.467
The Superiority  Of The Honoured  Medina  To All Cities
After  Mecca,  there  is no place  on the surface  of the earth  much  better  than the 
City (Medina)  of The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him",  seeing  that the good deeds therein  are also multiplied.  The Messenger  of 
Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said in this respect  (according  to


Page 470:
468 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
the authentic  narration  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah):  "A single  prayer  to be 
offered  in this mosque  of mine  (in Medina)  is better  than one thousand  prayers  to 
be offered  in any mosque  else except  the Sacred  Mosque  (in Mecca)."  The same  
is also true of any good  deed  therein  which  is muldplied  by one thousand.
There comes  in rank after Medina  the Sacred  land (the Farthest  Mosque)  
wherein  a single  prayer  is equal  to five hundred  prayers  in any mosque  else other  
than the Sacred  Mosque  (of Mecca),  and the same is true of all the good deeds.  
(According  to an unidentified  narration  on the authority  of) Ibn Abbas,  The  
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "A single  
prayer  to be offered  in the mosque  of Medina  is equal  to ten thousand  prayers;  
and a single  prayer  to be offered  in the Farthest  Mosque  is equal  to one thousand  
prayers;  and a single prayer  to be offered  in the Sacred  Mosque  (of Mecca)  is 
equal to one hundred  thousand  prayers."  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him" further  said (according  to the narration  on the 
authority  of Abu Hurairah,  Ibn Umar  and Abu Sa'id):  "He,  who patiendy  endures  
its (Medina's)  severity  and hardship,  I will be an intercessor  for him on the Day  
of Judgement."  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon  
him" said (according  to the narration  of Ibn Majah and At-Tirmidhi  on the 
authority  of Ibn Umar):  "If anyone  could,  let him die in Medina,  for none dies 
therein  but that I will be an intercessor  for him on the Day of  Judgement."
All places  after those  three are equal (in value),  except  the frontier  openings,  
for to stand therein  for the sake of safeguard  and defense  has a great  excellence.  
For this reason,  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon  
him" said (according  to what is unanimously  narrated  on the authority  of both  
Abu Hurairah  and Abu Sa'id):  "No journey  should  be made (to any mosque  on 
earth)  but to three  mosques:  the Sacred  Mosque  (of Mecca),  this mosque  of mine  
(in Medina),  and the Farthest  Mosque  (of Palestine)."  A learned  man goes as far 
as to tell that this narration  attests  the forbiddance  of journey  to visit the shrines,  
the graves  of the learned  men and the righteous  pious  people.  But what appears  
to me is different,  for we are commanded  to pay such visits.  The Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said (according  to the narration  
of Muslim  on the authority  of Buraidah  Ibn Al-Husaib):  "I had forbidden  you to 
visit graves.  But now  you might  visit them,  and speak  not with obscenity."
However,  this narration  pertains  to mosques,  which  are different  from  shrines,  
for all mosques,  after those  three,  are equal  in value,  and there  is no town  but that 
it contains  a mosque;  and thus there  is no significance  of setting  out on journey  
to any mosque  of them. But it is not the same in relation  to the shrines,  the 
blessing  of whose  visit differs  with the difference  of their degrees  in the Sight  of 
Allah  Almighty.  But if one lives in a place  wherein  there  is no mosque,  he might  
set out on journey  to another  place  wherein  there lies a mosque,  and he has the 
right to move to live in it if he so likes. Therefore,  would  that I knew  whether  
this speaker  would  prevent  the people  from setting  out on journey  to visit the


Page 471:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage  
graves  of such Prophets  as Abraham,  Moses,  Yahya  "Peace  be upon him"! it is 
very impossible  to decide  such prevention.  But if he makes  it permissible,  then  
this permission  would  include  the graves  of the saints,  the learned  men, and the 
righteous  pious people.  So, it is not unlikely  that this (visitation  of the graves  of 
the learned  men) might  be the purpose  of the journey,  in the same  way as visiting  
the learned  men  who are living  is among  the purposes  of journey.
This is so much for journey.  As for residence,  it is more fitting  for the 
seeker  (of knowledge)  to stick to his homeland  particularly  when  he is living  
in peace and safety unless his purpose  from the journey  is to acquire  
knowledge.  But if he is not safe, let him seek, from amongst  the places,  such  
as is closer  to peacefulness,  much safer for his religion,  more ready to make  
him devote  his heart (to worship)  and more  convenient  to him to practice  his 
religious  service.  Such will be the best of places for him. The Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said (according  to the 
narration  of Ahmad  and At-Tabarani  on the authority  of Az-Zubair):  "All 
cities and towns  belong  to Allah,  and all the creatures  are Allah's  slaves:  so, 
wherever  you find it convenient  to you to stay, live there,  and give thanks  to 
Allah Almighty  for that." According  to the narration  (of Ibn Majah  on the 
authority  of Anas and A'ishah):  "He, who is blessed  in a certain  thing,  let him 
stick to it, and he, who has his livelihood  in a certain  thing,  let not him leave  i 
until  it changes  against  him."
Abu Na'im  said: I saw Sufyan  Ath-Thawri  having  his leather  container  upon  
his shoulder,  and his sandals  in his hand. I asked him: "Where  are you going  O 
Abu Abdullah?"  He said: "To a town  where  I could  fill my leather  container  with  
(goods  for) a Dirham"  or according  to another  version:  "I have been  informed  of 
a village  in which  the conditions  of living  are low, and I like to stay in it." I asked  
him: "Do you do this O Abu Abdullah?"  he said: "Yes:  if you heard  of a town  in 
which  the prices  are low, aim at it, for it will be safer for your religion,  and less 
prompting  of your  apprehension."469
He used to say: "This is the time in which  the inactive  anonymous  are not 
what then about  the renown?  This is the time of movement,  in which  a secure,
moves from one village to another  in flight with his religion  from man
afflictions."  It is related  from  him that he said: "By Allah,  I do not know  which  of 
the countries  is more fitting  for residence."  Khurasan  was pointed  out to him,  
thereupon  he said: "Its people are of opposing  doctrines,  and misleading  
opinions."  When  Sham  was pointed  out to him he said: "Then,  the fingers  will 
beckon  to you" in reference  to celebrity.  When  Iraq was described  to him he said:  
"It is the country  of the tyrants."  When  Mecca  was mentioned  to him he said:  
"No doubt,  Mecca  melts  both bag and body."
A stranger  said to him: "I decided  to reside  in Mecca:  what  advice  should  you 
give me?" he said: "I advise  you to do three things:  pray not in the first row,  
accompany  not a Quraishi  man, and make not public  your objects  of charity."


Page 472:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 470
However,  he disliked  (the prayer  in) the first row because  such as does obtains  
fame,  and whenever  he is absent,  he will be searched  for, with the result  that his 
deed  might  be mixed  with adornment  and ostentation.
PART  TWO:
The conditions  of the obligation  of greater  pilgrimage;  the validity  
of its pillars;  its duties  and taboos
As for the conditions  of the obligation  of Hajj, they are two: the validity  of 
Hajj,  and the due time of Hajj in addition  to being  a Muslim.
The first: the pilgrimage  performed  by a child is valid,  and he could  assume  
Ihram  by himself  if he has attained  the age of discernment;  but his guardian  could  
assume  Ihram  on his behalf  if he is still under  age, and in this case, he performs  
with him what he should  perform  in Hajj, such as the circumambulation  (round  
the House),  compassing  (Safa and Marwah)  round,  and all the ceremonies  of 
Hajj.
The second:  The due time of Hajj lies within  the limits of Shawwal,  passing  
by Dhul-Qa'dah,  until the ninth  day of Dhul-Hijjah,  up to the rise of dawn  of the 
day of Sacrifice.  If one assumes  Ihram  at any time else, his Ihram  should  be for 
Umrah  (and not Hajj); and the time of Umrah  includes  the whole  year, except  
that if one is devoted  to do the rites (of Hajj) during  the days of Mina,  he should  
not assume  Ihram  for Umrah,  for in this case, he would  not be able to engage  
himself  with its ceremonies,  in view  of his being  involved  in the duties  of Mina.
As for the condition  of its effectiveness  as the obligatory  Hajj enjoined  by 
Islam,  they are five: (the faith in) Islam,  freedom  (from  slavery),  the attainment  of 
the age of puberty,  sanity,  and (performing  it at its) due time. But if the child or 
the slave assume  Ihram  and the child has attained  the age of puberty  and the 
slave has been emancipated  once they reach  Arafah,  or Muzdalifah  and returned  
to Arafah  before  the rising  of the sun, it will suffice  them for the obligatory  Hajj 
enjoined  by Islam; and that's because  the (fundamental  pillar of) Hajj is (the 
standing  at) Arafah.  Furthermore,  no sacrifice  more  than a sheep  is binding  upon  
them.  The same conditions  barring  the due time apply  also to Umrah  stipulated  
by Islam.
As for the conditions  of the effectiveness  of Hajj as supererogatory  upon  the 
free adult  in Islam,  he should  have become  free from  the obligatory  Hajj enjoined  
upon  him by Islam  (by performing  it). To be sure, the obligatory  Hajj enjoined  by 
Islam  has the priority,  followed  by the compensatory  Hajj in lieu of that which  
one invalidates  through  committing  anything  while  being  in the state of standing  
(at Arafah,  followed  by that which  is vowed,  then by that which  is performed  on 
behalf  (of one's mother  or father  in case it is due upon  him or her), and then by 
the supererogatory  Hajj. This sequence  should  be observed.  This (supererogatory  
Hajj)  is also effective  if one states  the intention  of anything  different.
There  are five conditions  for the obligation  of Hajj, i.e. the attainment  of the 
age of puberty,  the (faith in) Islam, sanity, freedom  (from slavery),  and the


Page 473:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage
capability  (i.e. the availability  of financial  resources  and power).  If one has the 
obligation  of Hajj binding  upon him, the duty of Umrah  also should  be binding  
upon him. He, who likes to enter  Mecca  for trade or visit, and he is not a cutter  
of fire wood,  should  assume  Ihram,  according  to a certain  opinion,  which he 
should  not put off except  by performing  Umrah  or Hajj.
The capability  is of two kinds:  one is direct,  which  might  be determined  by 
several  factors,  which  include  either  one's own self, through  health  and power  
(which  enable  him to endure  the difficulties  of Hajj),  or in the road,  which  should  
be fertile  and secure,  with no dangerous  water  nor overpowering  enemy,  or the 
financial  resources,  according  to which  one should  have the wherewithal  which  
enables  him to go (to perform  Hajj) and return  home  once  again,  whether  he has 
or has not a family  there, for indeed  the departure  of one's homeland  is very  
difficult.  He should  also have the expenses  of those for he is responsible  during  
that period  (of his absence),  and to have what enables  him to fulfill his debt  
(before  setting  out on journey),  and to be able to have or at least rent a riding  
mount,  whether  it is a litter  or a sack if he can afford  for it.
The second  kind is that the disabled  person  is capable,  by his wealth,  of hiring  
somebody  to perform  Hajj on his behalf;  and this should  be after such a hireling  
have fulfilled  the obligation  of Hajj due upon him according  to Islamic  law. In 
this kind, it is sufficient  for him to have the provisions  of the journey  with the 
help of a sack. If a son offers  himself  (to do that on behalf  of) his disabled  father,  
he (the latter)  would  become  capable  therewith,  but if he offers  his money  to 
him, he would  not become  capable  therewith.  That's  because  in the service  with  
the body there is honour  for the son, whereas  giving  his wealth  puts the father  
under  obligation  to his son.
Whoever  is capable,  performing  Hajj then becomes  binding  upon  him, and it 
is true that it is possible  for him to delay  it, but in this case he will put himself  to 
risk: if it becomes  easy for him even at the last portion  of his lifetime,  it will 
suffice  him for the obligation;  and if he dies before  performing  the obligation  of 
Hajj, he will meet  Allah  as disobedient,  by leaving  Hajj (which  is one of the five 
fundaments  of Islam);  and Hajj then becomes  a part of his legacy  which  should  
be performed  on his behalf  even  with no bequest  for that on his part, the same  as 
all of his debts.  If, in a certain  year, he is capable,  but does not set out with the 
people,  and in the same year, his wealth  is lost before  the people  perform  Hajj , 
and then he dies, he will meet  Allah  Almighty  with no Hajj to be due upon  him.
But he who dies without  performing  the obligation  of Hajj, in spite of 
convenience  and capability,  his matter  will be difficult  with Allah  Almighty.  Umar  
Ibn Al-Khattab  said: "I intended  to issue a decree  of imposing  Jizyah  (tribute)  
upon such as does not perform  Hajj from amongst  those who have the 
wherewithal  to do it." According  to Sa'id Ibn Jubair,  Ibrahim  An-Nakh'i,  Mujahid  
and Tawus:  "If I know  about  a wealthy  man upon  whom  the obligation  of Hajj 
was due, and he died without  performing  it, I would  offer no funeral  prayer  on471


Page 474:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
him." One of them had a wealthy  neighbour  who died without  performing  the 
obligation  of Hajj, thereupon  he did not offer funeral  prayer  on him. According  
to Ibn Abbas:  "He, who died without  performing  Hajj or giving obligatory  
charity  will ask to be made  to return  once again  to this world  (to do that)."  Then,  
he recited  the statement  of Allah  Almighty:  " he says: "O my Lord!  send me back  
(to life), In order  that I may work  righteousness  in the things  I neglected.""  (Al- 
Mu'minun  99:100)
jJ* l^j] ^ LLi iS-sluo  jJjd (ftp) Oj Jli <lSyS\ Jj?-I lij ^Jj>- y
*
i © Jj 0*3 UV1*
He tells that he refers  here to the obligation  of Hajj.
As to the pillars  without  which  Hajj is invalid,  they are five: to assume  Ihram,  to 
circumambulate  the House,  to compass  Safa and Marwah  round,  to stand at 
Arafah,  and to get the head shaved  after it, according  to a certain  doctrine.  The  
same  pillars  barring  the standing  at Arafah  correspond  to Umrah.
As for the duties  which  might  be compensated  with offering  sacrifice,  they are 
six: the assuming  of Ihram  from  the certain  place  appointed  for the people  to put 
on Ihram:  if one leaves  that and goes beyond  such fixed place,  an offering  of a 
sheep becomes  due upon him. Such offering  is also due upon (leaving)  the 
throwing  (of Jamrah  with pebbles)  and there is no difference  in that. As for 
leaving  the stay in Arafah  until the setting  of the sun, spending  the night in 
Muzdalifah,  and spending  (three) nights in Mina, in addition  to the farewell  
circumambulation,  those should  be compensated  with blood,  according  to one 
saying. But this blood, according  to another  saying, is only desirable  (not  
obligatory).
There  are three  kinds  of performing  Hajj and Umrah:
The first pertains  to Ifrad (to set out with the sole intention  to perform  Hajj  
only),  and it is better.  It is to put on Ihram  only for Hajj, and when  he finishes  
and puts off Ihram,  he assumes  Ihram  once again for Umrah.  The best place of 
assuming  Ihram  for Umrah  is Ji'ranah,  followed  by Tan'im,  and then Hudaibiyah.  
However,  no blood (offering  of a sheep)  is due upon the performer  of Hajj  
solely,  unless  it is voluntary.
The second  pertains  to Qiran  (to assume  Ihram  with intention  to perform  
both Umrah  and Hajj jointly).  It is to combine  both Umrah  and Hajj in his 
intention  of Ihram  saying:  "I'm responding  to Your  Call O Allah  with both Hajj 
and Umrah!"  in this case his Ihram  implies  both. In this kind,  it suffices  him for 
the ceremonies  of both the rites of Hajj, since those of Umrah  will have been  
merged  into those of Hajj, in the same way as ablution  is merged  into bathing.  
But if he circumambulates  (round  the House)  and compasses  Safa and Marwah  
round  before  his standing  at Arafah,  only his compassing  Safa and Marwah  round  
will be applicable  to both (Umrah  and Hajj), but this is not so in relation  to472


Page 475:
473 Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage
circumambulation,  since the obligatory  circumambulation  of Hajj should be 
performed  after standing  at Arafah.  An offering  of a sheep is due upon such  
combines  both Umrah  and Hajj joindy  unless  he is a Meccan,  for in this case,  
nothing  is due upon  him, for he does not leave the place fixed to him to assume  
Ihram,  which  is Mecca  .
The third  pertains  to Tamattu'  (to continue  Umrah  on to Hajj).  It is to cross  
the place  fixed for assuming  Ihram  while  being  in the state of Ihram  for Hajj,  and 
then to put off Ihram  in Mecca,  and enjoy  of all things  that are forbidden  to such  
as in the state of Ihram,  on to the time of Hajj,  when  he assumes  Ihram  for Hajj 
once again. However,  one should  have the privilege  of continuing  Umrah  on to 
Hajj only with five condidons:  one is that one should not belong  to the 
inhabitants  of the Sacred  Mosque,  i.e. those  who are at a distance  from it not so 
far as to force them to shorten  the prayer.  The second  is to perform  Umrah  
ahead  of Hajj. The third  is to perform  his Umrah  during  the months  of Hajj.  The 
fourth  is not to return  to the place fixed for assuming  Ihram  of Hajj,  nor as far as 
is equal to its distance  to put on Ihram  once again.  The fifth is to perform  both  
his Umrah  and Hajj on behalf  of the same  person.
If all of those condidons  are present  in somebody,  he then should  be in the 
state of Tamattu',  and in this case, an offering  of a sheep  is due upon  him. If he 
could  not find that, let him observe  three fasts during  the period  of Hajj before  
the day of Sacrifice,  whether  consecutively  or with intervals,  in addition  to seven  
fasts when  he returns  to his homeland.  But if he does not observe  the three  fasts  
until he returns to his homeland,  let him observe  the ten fasts whether  
consecutively  or with intervals.  The compensation  for the offering  of both Qiran  
and Tamattu'  is the same.  To be sure, performing  Hajj solely  (Ifrad)  is the best,  
followed  by continuing  Umrah  on to Hajj (Tamattu'),  and then performing  both  
Umrah  and Hajj jointly  (Qiran).
There  are six taboos  pertaining  to both  Hajj and Umrah:
The first is to wear  a shirt, trousers,  footwears  (or leather  socks)  or a turban.  
That's  because  one should  put on a lower  garment  and an upper  garment,  and 
sandals.  If he could not find sandals,  let him trim the footwears  until the heels  
become  bare; and if he could  not find a lower  garment,  let it be trousers.  There  is 
no blame  on him to utilize  girdle  and sit in the shade  of the litter, provided  that 
he should  not cover his head, since his sanctity  lies in his head. As for the 
woman,  let her wear  any sewn  dress,  provided  that she should  not cover  her face,  
since  her sanctity  lies in her face.
The second  pertains  to perfume.  The performer  of Hajj or Umrah  should  
keep himself  away from any kind that is considered  to be perfume.  But if he 
applies  perfume  or his body,  or puts on (something  that is perfumed),  an offering  
of a sheep  becomes  due upon  him.
The third  pertains  to getting  the head shaved  or the nails cut off. If one does


Page 476:
474 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
any of both, a ransom  i.e. an offering  of a sheep  becomes  due upon him. But 
there  is no harm  to apply  kohl (to the eyes),  enter  the bath, get oneself  exposed  
to phlebotomy  or cupping,  or to comb  the hair.
The fourth pertains  to sexual intercourse.  It vitiates the ceremonies  
particularly  when  it is done before  the first desacralization,  and an offering  of a 
camel or a cow or seven sheep become  due. But it does not corrupt  the 
ceremonies  if it is done  after the second  desacralization,  and in this case, a camel  
becomes  due.
The fifth pertains  to the entries  to sexual  intercourse,  such as the kiss or 
touch  of women,  which  break  the ablution.  It is forbidden,  and an offering  of 
sheep is due upon such as does it The same is true of masturbation.  It is 
forbidden  to marry  or give in marry,  and no offering  is due since the tie of 
marriage  is not established.
The sixth  pertain  to killing  the wild game,  i.e. what  is lawful  to eat, and what  
is produced  from what is lawful  or unlawful.  If one kills a game,  the like of it 
from  life-stock  becomes  due upon  him, with special  regard  to the observation  of 
natural  proximity  between  species.  However,  the sea game is lawful,  and no 
reprisal  is due concerning  it.
CHAPTER  TWO:
ON THE SEQUENCE  OF THE OUTWARD  ACTS  (OF GREATER  
PILGRIMAGE)  FROM  TRAVELING  TO RETURNING  HOME
Those  acts are included  in ten subsections:
The First Subsection
Starts  From  The Beginning  Of The Setting  Out On 
Journey  To Assuming  Ihram
This subsection  comprises  eight  things:
The first pertains  to fund:  he should  first turn to Allah  in repentance,  remove  
injustices,  fulfill his debts, prepare  the expenses  of such as for whom  he is 
responsible  during  the period  of his absence  until his return,  return  such of 
deposits  as entrusted  to him to their owners,  and take with him from the fairly  
and lawfully  earned money  what suffices  him to go and return,  with no 
parsimony,  but with convenience,  in such a way as to enable  him to be liberal  
with his provisions,  and lenient  to the weak  and poor.  Let him give something  in 
charity  before  he sets out Let him buy or rent a riding  mount,  strong  enough  to 
carry him and endure  the difficulty  of the journey;  and in case he rents it, he 
should  brief  the hirer of all that he likes to carry  on it, no matter  little or much  
(light  or heavy)  it might  be, and secure  his consent.
The second  pertains  to the companion.  Let (the performer  of Hajj) seek a 
good righteous  companions,  famous  for his liking  for good,  to which  he might  
aid him once he forgets  to remember  it; and if he remembers  it, he helps him;


Page 477:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage  
and if he proves  coward,  he gives confidence  to him; and if he proves  weak,  he 
supports  him; and if he is disturbed,  he causes  him to be more patient.  Let him 
bid farewell  to his resident  neighbours,  friends  and brothers,  and seek their  
invocation,  since Allah Almighty  makes  good in their invocations  for him. It is 
out of Prophetic  usage to say while bidding  farewell  to them (according  to the 
narration  of At-Tirmidhi  and An-Nasa'i  on the authority  of Ibn Umar):  "I entrust  
to Allah  Almighty  your religion,  honesty,  and the concluding  among  your deeds,  
the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" used to say to 
such as liked to set out on journey  (according  to the narration  of both At- 
Tabarani  and At-Tirmidhi  on the authority  of Anas): "Let you be in Allah's  
Protection  and under  His Care! Might  Allah  provide  you with piety,  forgive  your  
sin, and guide  you to good  wherever  you are."
The third relates  to the setting  out of the home.  Once he intends  to come  
out, he should  offer a two-rak'ah  prayer,  and recite in the first rak'ah  after Al- 
Fatihah:  "Say: O you who reject  faith",  and in the second:  "Say: 'He is Allah,  the 
One and Only'."  When  he finishes,  let him raise both his hands  and invoke  Allah  
Almighty  with sincere  purity  and true intention,  saying:  "O Allah!  You are the 
companion  on journey,  the One Who succeeds  the absent  in guarding  one's  
family,  property,  offspring  and friends  (in his absence):  save both them and us 
from every  kind of evil and defect.  O Allah!  We ask You, in this journey  of ours,  
righteousness  and piety,  and from  the deeds  that which  pleases  You. O Allah!  We 
ask You to roll up the ground  for us (i.e. to shorten  the distance)  and make  easy  
the journey  upon us, and to endow  us, in this journey,  with the safety  of body,  
religion  and property,  and to enable  us perform  Hajj to Your  House,  and visit the 
grave  of Your  Prophet  Muhammad  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him".  O 
Allah!  We seek refuge  with You from the trouble  of the journey,  the gloominess  
of sight, the evil changes  in the family,  property,  offspring  and companions.  O 
Allah!  Make  us and them  in Your  Presence,  and deprive  us and them  not of Your  
blessing,  and change  not our and their  power  and health  (to the opposite)."
The fourth  is that when  he stands  at the door of the house,  let him say: "In 
the Name  of Allah! I've put my trust in Allah,  and there is neither  might  nor 
power  but with Allah.  I seek refuge  with You O my Lord! I seek refuge  from  
going  astray  or being  misled;  and I seek refuge  with You from humiliating  or 
being  put to humiliation,  from stumbling  or being  made  to stumble,  from being  
oppressor  or oppressed,  and from behaving  ignorantly  or being exposed  to 
ignorance.  O Allah! I have not come out because  of showing  arrogance  or 
haughtiness,  nor by way of showing  off to be seen or heard of men: on the 
contrary,  I've come out for fear of Your Displeasure,  and in the hope of Your  
Pleasure,  in fulfillment  of the obligation  enjoined  by You upon me, and in 
imitation  of the tradition  of Your  Prophet,  and longing  for meeting  You."
When  he walks  he should  say: "O Allah!  It is with You that I was brought  to 
life, upon  You I've put my trust, by You I've held fast, and to You I've turned475


Page 478:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
my face. O Allah!  It is You (upon  Whom  I put) my Reliance,  and You are my 
hope: suffice  me against  what concerns  me and what concerns  me not, and 
what  You have knowledge  of better  than me: Honoured  be Your Shelter,  and 
Exalted  be Your  Praise,  and there is no god other  than You. O Allah!  Endow  
me with piety,  forgive  for me my sin, and direct  me to good  wherever  I turn."  
Let him supplication  with that supplication  in every  halting  place  he happens  to 
enter.476
The fifth pertains  to riding.  Once he rides his mount,  let him say: "In the 
Name  of Allah!  With AJlah (I ride), and Allah is Greater:  I’ve put my trust in 
Allah,  and there is neither  might  nor power  but with Allah,  Most High, Most  
Great.  What  Allah  wills is, and what  He wills not is not. Praise  be to Allah who  
guided  us to that, and had it not been for the fact that Allah  guided  us, we would  
have  had no power  to be guided  aright ” (Al-A ’raf 43)
4 Lj i Ujj-a <jj]\ lb iyiij  ^
And  we are returning  to (Allah)  our Lord.  O Allah!  I've turned  my face to you,  
entrusted  the whole  matter  of me to You, put my trust, in all of my affairs  to 
You:  You do suffice  us for the best disposer  (of all affairs).
If one sets right on the mount,  and it takes its position  under  him, he should  
say seven  times:  "Glory  be to Allah;  Praise  be to Allah,  there  is neither  might  nor 
power  but with Allah;  and Allah  is greater.  Praise  be to Allah  Who guided  us to 
that, and we would  not have been guided  had Allah  not guided  us. O Allah!  It is 
You Who causes  (us) to ride on the back (of this mount)  and it is from  You that 
help is sought  in all the affairs."
The sixth  pertains  to the descent.  It is out of the tradition  not to stop for 
rest until the day is hot in such a way that the greater  portion  of the journey  
would  be at night.  The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" said (according  to the narration  of Abu Dawud  on the authority  of Anas  
and Malik  on the authority  of Khalid  Ibn Ma'dan):  "Be eager  to make  (the most  
of your journey)  at night,  during  which  the land is better  traversed  than it is 
during  the day." Let him also make  little his sleep at night,  in order  to become  
more  helpful  to proceed.  Once  he approaches  the place of rest, let him say: "O 
Allah,  the Lord of the seven firmaments  of heaven  and what they shade,  and 
the Lord of the seven  earths  and what  they contain,  the Lord  of Satan  and what  
they mislead,  the Lord of winds  and what they scatter,  and the Lord of oceans  
and what  runs in them:  I ask You the good  of this place  of rest and the good  of 
its inhabitants,  and I seek refuge  with You from  the evil of this place  of rest and 
the evil of what it contains:  avert from me the evil of its evil ones."  Once he 
descends  let him offer a two-rak ’ah prayer  and then supplicate:  "I seek refuge  
with Allah's  Perfect  Words  which  no wicked  nor pious  could  go beyond,  from  
the evil of what He has created."  When  night  enters  upon  him let him say: "O


Page 479:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage  
land! My and your Lord is Allah.  I seek refuge  with Allah from your evil and 
from the evil which  you contains,  and from the evil of what moves  on you. I 
seek refuge  with Allah from the evil of every  lion, serpent,  female-snake  and 
scorpion;  and I seek refuge  with You from the evil of the townsmen  and from  
(the evil of) a father  and his son. To him does belong  such as resides  at night  
and by day: and He is All-Hearing,  All-Seeing. ” (Al-An ’am 13)477
The seventh  pertains  to guarding.  The performer  of Hajj should  be cautious  
during  the day, in the sense  that he should  not walk apart from the caravan,  lest 
he might  be assassinated  or lost, as well as he should  be careful  on sleeping:  if he 
sleeps  at the first portion  of the night,  let him spread  out his arm, and if he sleeps  
at the last portion  of the night,  let him set up his arm, and placed  his head in his 
hand. As such did the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" use to sleep on journey  (according  to the narration  of Ahmad  and At- 
Tirmidhi  on the authority  of Abu Qatadah);  and that's because  one might  have  
his sleep so much  heavy  that the sun would  rise without  making  sense  to it, and 
thus, the prayer  (of Fajr) which  might  escape  him is better  than (the reward)  he 
will receive  from Hajj. It is most  desirable  to be observed  at night  that each two 
companions  should  undertake  the process  of guarding  by turns,  so that if one of 
them slept, the other  would  guard  him and so on (according  to the narration  of 
Al-Baihaqi  on the authority  of Jabir).  This is in accordance  with the tradition.
If he becomes  a target  of an enemy  or a wild animal,  whether  at night or 
during  the day, let him recite  the Holy  Verse  of the Throne,  the (eighteenth  Holy  
Verse  of A1 Imran  in which  Allah says) "Allah  bears witness...",  in addition  to 
the Surah  of Al-Ikhlas,  and both Surahs  of seeking  refuge  with Allah,  and say: "In 
the Name  of Allah,  what  Allah  wills (should  happen);  there  is no power  but with  
Allah; Allah suffices  me; I've put my trust in Allah;  what Allah wills (should  
inevitably  come to pass); none brings  about  good but Allah;  what Allah wills  
(should  come to pass);  none averts  evil but Allah;  Allah suffices  me and He is 
most sufficient  (for guardian);  Allah  hears such as invokes  Him; there  is nothing  
beyond  Allah;  and there is no refuge  besides  Allah.  Allah  Almighty  has decreed:  
'Surely,  I will prevail,  I and My Messengers:  verily  Allah is Strong,  Exalted  in 
Honour'.  (Al-Mujadilah  21)
i ©V  M ifJS  aT'^  >
I fortify  myself  by Allah,  Most Great,  and I seek the aid of (Allah)  the Ever-  
Living  Who never  dies. O Allah! Guard  us with Your Eye which  never  sleeps,  
and protect  us with Your  Care which  is inviolable.  O Allah!  Bestow  mercy  upon  
us with Your Power  over us, so that we would  not perish  since You are our 
confidence  and hope.  O Allah!  Make  merciful  the hearts  of the male and female  
of Your servants  towards  us, and cause them to treat us with mercy and


Page 480:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
clemency:  You are the Most  Merciful  of those  who are merciful. ”
The eighth  is that whenever  he comes  up a promontory  of land on the way,  it 
is desirable  to glorify  Allah  thrice,  and say: "O Allah!  Yours  is Honour  over every  
honour,  and praise  be to You for every  state."  Whenever  he comes  down,  let him 
exalt  Allah;  and whenever  he feels afraid  of loneliness  on his journey,  let him say: 
Exalted  be Allah,  the Holy  King,  the Lord of angels  and the Holy  Spirit:  You've  
honoured  the heavens  with  Power  and Glory."
The Second  Subsection:
The Proprieties  Of Ihram  From  The Place Fixed  For Assuming  Hiram
To Entering  Mecca
They  are five, and those  go as follows:
The first is that he should  take bath,  with the intention  to be the bathing  of 
Ihram,  i.e. once he reaches  the place wherefrom  the people  assume  Ihram.  He 
should  make  perfect  his bathing  by getting  himself  clean,  combing  his beard  and 
head, trimming  his nails, cutting  short his mustache,  and then complete  the 
cleaning  which  we have  discussed  in the book  of purification.
The second  is that he should  leave the sewn dress,  and rather  put on the 
garments  of Ihram,  i.e. a lower  garment  and an upper  garment,  and both should  
be white, since the white among  dresses  is the dearest  in the Sight of Allah  
Almighty.  He also might  apply  perfume  to both his garment  and body,  and there  
is no harm  if its traces  remain  after  assuming  Ihram.  However,  the glitter  of musk  
which  had been  used on assuming  Ihram  was visible  on the parting  of the hair of 
the head of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him"  
after his assuming  Ihram  (according  to an authentic  narration  on the authority  of 
A'ishah).
The third  is that he should  wait after  putting  on his garments  until his mount  
moves  with him in case he is riding,  or until he starts  walking  if he is on foot;  and 
at that moment,  let him assume  Ihram  for Hajj or Umrah,  whether  joindy  or each  
solely  as he likes. Only the intention  is sufficient  to conclude  the Ihram,  but it is 
out of the tradition  to join with the intention  the wording  of Talbiyah  (response  
to Allah's  Call): "Fm responding  to Your call O Allah,  Fm responding  to Your  
call, You have no partner  with You, Fm responding  to Your  call. All the praises  
and blessings  be to You,  All the dominion  be for You. You have  no partner  with  
You. ” (LabbaikAllahumma  labbaik.  Labbaika  la sharika  laka labbaik.  Innalhamda  
wan-ni ’mata laka walmulk.  La sharika  lak). If he likes to add to it, let him further  
say: “Fm responding  to Your  call! Fm responding  to Your  call! All happiness  be 
with You! Ail goodness  be with Your Hands.  Fm responding  to Your call. All 
desires  (of Your mercy)  and deeds (of worship)  be to You. I'm responding  to 
Your  Call with a greater  pilgrimage  in truth,  in devotion  and in bondage.  O Allah!  
Send Your  Prayer  and Blessing  upon Muhammad  as well as upon the family  of 
Muhammad. ”
The fourth  is that once his Ihram  is concluded  with the above-mentioned  
wording  of Talbiyah,  it is desirable  to say those  words:  "O Allah!  I've intended  to 
perform  Hajj: make  it easy for me, and help me fulfill  its ceremonies,  and accept478


Page 481:
479 Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage  
it from  me. O Allah!  I intend  to fulfill  Your  obligation  of Hajj: make  me of those  
who have responded  to Your  Call, had trust  in Your  Promise,  and followed  Your  
Command;  and make  me a member  of Your  delegate  with whom  You have been  
well-pleased  and satisfied,  and accepted  (the religious  service)  from them. O 
Allah!  Make  it easy to me to perform  the obligation  of Hajj which  I’ve intended.  
O Allah!  I have assumed  Ihram  for You with my flesh,  hair, blood,  sinews,  brain  
and bone,  and I've made  unlawful  for me women,  perfume,  and wearing  the 
among  dresses,  just out of seeking  Your Countenance  and the (reward  of the) 
hereafter."  As of the time of assuming  Ihram,  all the six taboos  which  we've  
mentioned  earlier  become  unlawful  for him; so, let him avoid  them.
The fifth is that it is desirable  to renew  the wording  to Talbiyah  (response  to 
Allah's  Call) along the duration  of Ihram,  particularly  on the encountering  of 
other companions  and the gathering  of the people,  on every ascending  and 
descending,  on every  mounting  and dismounting,  raising  his voice  with it, in such  
a way as not to cause  his voice  to become  hoarse,  or he himself  pants,  because  
"He is not calling  one who is deaf  or absent"  according  to the authentic  narration  
(on the authority  of Abu Musa).  There  is no harm to raise the voice with the 
wording  of Talbiyah  in the three mosques,  i.e. the Sacred  House,  the mosque  of 
Khaif, and the mosque  of Miqat, for those are most fitting for places of 
performing  the ceremonies.  But the wording  of Talbiyah  might  be uttered  in the 
other  mosques  without  raising  the voice.  However,  whenever  the Messenger  oi 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" was admired  by anything,  he 
would  say (according  to the narration  of Ash-Shafi'i  on the authority  of Mujahid):  
"I'm responding  to Your Call (O Allah): there is no living but that of the 
hereafter  (which  is never-ending)."sewn
The Third  Subsection:
The Proprieties  Of Entering  Mecca  To The Circumambulation
Those  are six, and they  go as follows:
The first is to take bath in (the place of) Dhu-Tuwa  with the intention  to 
enter  Mecca;  and there  are nine desirable  (occasions  for) bathing  set for Hajj: the 
first is for assuming  Ihram  from  the Miqat  and then for entering  Mecca,  then for 
offering  circumambulation  of arrival,  then for standing  at Arafah,  then for the 
stay in Muzdalifah,  and three for the throwing  of the three  Jamrahs,  and there is 
no particular  bating for the Jamrah  of Aqabah,  and then one bathing  for 
performing  the circumambulation  of farewell.  According  to the later doctrine  of 
Ash-Shafi'i,  there  is no necessity  for taking  bath for the circumambulation  of visit  
nor for the circumambulation  of farewell;  and in this way those are reduced  to 
seven.
The second  is that he should  say, on entering  the borders  of the Sanctuary,  
even though  outside  Mecca:  "O Allah!  This is Your  Sanctuary,  which  is also Your  
(place  of) safety:  please,  forbid  my flesh, blood,  hair and complexion  to the fire 
(of Hell); and make me safe from Your punishment  on the day You will raise  
Your  servants;  and make  me one of Your  devotees  who obey  You (in service  and


Page 482:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 480
worship)."
The third  is that he should  enter  Mecca  from the side of Abtah,  i.e. the side 
of Kada,  to which  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" turned  on his way (to Mecca  according  to the authentic  narration  on the 
authority  of Ibn Umar).  So, it is more fitting  to emulate  him; and whenever  one 
comes  out (of Mecca),  let him come  out through  the side of Kuda,  i.e. the lower  
side,  versus  the former  which  the upper.
The fourth  is that once he enters  Mecca  and reaches  Ra's Ar-Radm,  and thus  
his eyes falls upon  the House,  let him say: "There  is no god (to be worshipped)  
but Allah,  and Allah  is Greater.  O Allah!  You are (the source  of) Peace,  and from  
You peace  is expected,  and Your  House  is the abode  of peace:  Blessed  be You,  
Lord of Glory,  Majesty  and Honour.  O Allah!  This is Your House  which  You  
have exalted,  honoured,  and dignified:  O Allah!  Increase  it in exaltation,  honour,  
dignity  and glory;  and increase  such as performs  Hajj to it in piety  and bounty.  O 
Allah!  open to me the gate of Your  Mercy,  and admit  me to Your  Garden,  and 
save me from  Satan,  the despised."
The fifth  is that when  he enters  the Sacred  Mosque,  let him enter  through  the 
door of Banu Shaibah  and say: "In the Name  of Allah,  and with Allah (I seek  
refuge),  and from Allah (I expect  good),  and to Allah  and in the Cause  of Allah  
and on the cult of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" (I do my ceremonies)."  Once  he approaches  the House,  let him say: "Praise  
be to Allah,  and peace  be upon such of His servants  as He has chosen.  O Allah!  
send Your  Prayer  and Blessing  upon Muhammad,  Your  servant  and Messenger,  
and upon Abraham,  Your Bosom  Friend,  and upon all of Your Prophets  and 
Messengers."
Then,  let him raise both his hands  and say: "O Allah!  I ask You,  in this station  
of mine,  in the first commencements  of my ceremonies  (of Hajj),  to accept  my 
repentance,  to overlook  my sin, and to relieve  me of the burdens  of my mistakes.  
Praise  be to Allah  Who  has reached  me to His Sacred  House,  which  He has made  
a place  of assembly  for the people,  and a place  of safety,  and made  it a source  of 
bless and guidance  to all the worlds.  O Allah! I'm Your servant;  this is Your  
town; this is Your Sanctuary;  and this is Your House.  I've come to seek after  
Your Mercy,  and ask You in the same way as such as is forced  by necessity  
should  ask You, afraid  of Your  punishment,  and expecting  for Your  Mercy,  and 
seeking  Your  Good  Pleasure."
The sixth is that he (the performer  of Hajj) should  aim at the Black  Stone,  to 
which  he should  go directly  and touch  it with his right hand, and kiss it while  
saying:  "O Allah! I've carried  out my charge,  and fulfilled  my covenant:  bear  
witness  to my fulfillment."  But if one could  not kiss it, let him stand facing  it and 
say the same,  and do nothing  other  than the performance  of circumambulation,  
i.e. the circumambulation  of arrival,  unless  he finds the people  being  engaged  in 
the obligatory  prayer,  thereupon  he should  pray with them  and then perform  the 
circumambulation.
The Fourth  Subsection:  On Circumambulation
When one intends  to begin circumambulation,  whether  that of arrival or


Page 483:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage  
anything  else, let him observe  six things:
The first is that he should  observe  the same conditions  of prayer,  pertaining  
to the purification  from excrements  and impurities  of body,  garment  and place,  
and cover  the private  parts,  for indeed,  the circumambulation  round  the House  is 
a kind of prayer,  except  that speech  in it is made  permissible  by Allah  Almighty  
(unlike prayer in which speech is not permissible).  Before starting  
circumambulation,  let him make the middle  portion  of his upper  garment  under  
his right armpit,  and place both its ends upon his left shoulder,  hanging  down  
one end on his back and the other on his breast. At the beginning  of 
circumambulation,  let him interrupt  his Talbiyah,  and rather  engage  himself  by 
the supplications  which  we are going  to mention  later.
The second  is that once he finished  from setting  his garment  as it should  be, 
let him then make the House  on his left, and stand near the Black Stone,  and 
move  aside from it a bit enough  to make  it in front of him, and thus he will be 
able to receive  the whole  Stone  with the whole  of his body  at the beginning  of his 
circumambulation.  Let him also be as close to the House  as no less than three  
steps,  in order  to be near enough  to the House,  for this is much  better  on the one 
hand, and in order that he should not include the fountain  in the 
circumambulation  for indeed,  although  such fountain  is a part of the House,  it 
might,  at the Black  Stone,  join to the ground,  and thus the circumambulation  of 
such as circumambulates  on it will be not valid. That is because  by so doing  he 
will be circumambulating  inside  the House,  for the fountain  is that part which  
remained  outside  the breadth  of the wall of the House after having  been  
narrowed  from its upper part. From that position,  let one start the 
circumambulation.481
The third is that at the beginning  of circumambulation,  and before  one goes  
beyond  the Black  Stone,  let him say (the following  supplication):  "In the Name  of 
Allah,  and Allah is Greater.  O Allah!  it is out of faith in You, and trust in Your  
Book,  and fulfillment  of Your  Pledge,  and following  the sunnah  of Your  Prophet  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" (I start circumambulation)."  Then,  let 
him begin circumambulation,  and once he goes beyond  the Black Stone and 
reaches  the door of the House,  let him say: "O Allah!  This House  is Yours;  this 
Sanctuary  is Yours;  this (place  of) safety  is Yours;  and this is the station  of such  
as seeks refuge  with You from the fire (of Hell)."  On mentioning  the Station,  let 
him point  with the help of his eyes to the Station  of Abraham  "Peace  be upon  
him" and resume:  "O Allah! Your House  is Great,  and Your Countenance  is
Honoured,  and You are the Most Merciful  of those  who show mercy.  Save me 
from  Satan  the despised,  and forbid  my flesh and blood  to the fire (of Hell),  and 
give me security  from the terrors  of the Day of Judgement,  and suffice  me the 
of both this world  and the hereafter." provisions
Then, let him exalt and praise Allah Almighty  until he reaches  the Corner  
which  is in the direction  of Iraq, at which  let him say: "O Allah! I seek refuge  
with You from (being given to) polytheism,  suspicion  (of faith), infidelity,  
hypocrisy,  schism,  the bad manners,  the evil sight of the family,  property  and


Page 484:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
offspring."  When he reaches  the spout let him say: "O Allah! shade us 
underneath  Your  Throne  on the very day on which  there will be no shade  but 
Yours.  O Allah!  give me drink  in the cup of Muhammad  "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" after  which  I will never  become  thirsty."
When  he reaches  the Comer  which  is in the direction  of Sham,  let him say: "O 
Allah! make this (of mine) Hajj that is accepted  (by You), (that of mine) a 
rewarded  endeavour,  and (that of mine)  a forgiven  sin, and (that of mine)  a trade  
which  will never  perish:  O (Allah)  Exalted  in Honour  and Power,  Oft-Forgiving.  
O Lord! Forgive  (my sins for me), and bestow  mercy  (upon  me), and overlook  
such (of sins) as you know:  verily,  You are Most  Exalted  in Power  and Honour,  
Most  Bounteous."  When  he when  he reaches  the Yemenite  Corner  (i.e. which  is 
in the direction  of Yemen),  let him say: "O Allah!  I seek refuge  with You from  
infidelity;  and I seek refuge  with You from  poverty;  and from the punishment  of 
the grave;  and from the affliction  of life and death;  and I seek refuge  with You  
from  (being  given  to) disgrace  in this world  and the hereafter."
When  he is in between  the Yemenite  Corner  and the Black  Stone,  let him say: 
"O Allah,  our Lord! Give us a good deed in this world,  and a good deed in the 
hereafter,  and save us, by Your  Mercy,  from the affliction  of the grave  and the 
punishment  of the fire (of Hell)."  When  he reaches  the Black  Stone,  let him say: 
"O Allah! forgive  for me by Your Mercy!  I seek refuge  with the Lord of this 
Stone from (being  given to) debt, poverty,  anxiety,  and the punishment  of the 
grave."  At this point,  he will have completed  one round  of (the seven  rounds  of) 
circumambulation;  and let him offer seven rounds  as such, and supplicate  with  
the same  supplications.
The fourth  is that one should  walk  at a quick  pace  while  moving  his shoulders  
(which  is called  Ramal)  in the first three  rounds,  and walk at a normal  pace in the 
remaining  four. Ramal  means  to be fast in walking  with close  steps,  and although  
it is slower  than running,  it is faster  than the normal  walking.  What  is intended  
from both walking  at a quick  pace while  moving  the shoulders  on the one hand,  
and placing  the middle  portion  of the upper  garment  under  the right armpit,  and 
placing  both its ends on the left shoulder  is to show skill, strength,  and good  
health.  This was at first, in order  to remove  any desire  on the part of the infidels  
(and pagans  to have false impression  of the Muslims),  but it has come  to be out 
of the right  way of sunnah.
It is better  to walk at a quick  pace while  one is close to the House.  But if it is 
impossible  because  of the crowds,  it is then better  to do that while  being  far from  
the house. Thus, let him come out to the margin of the place of 
circumambulation  and walk at a quick  pace for the first three rounds,  and then  
come close to the House  in the congestion  once again,  in order to walk at a 
normal  pace for the remaining  four rounds.  If it is possible  for him to touch  the 
(Black)  Stone  at every  round,  it is better,  otherwise,  if he is hindered  from  that by 
the congestion,  let him then point  to it with his hand and then kiss his hand.  The482
!


Page 485:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage
same is true of the Yemenite  corner,  touching  which,  from amongst  all the 
corners,  is desirable.  It is narrated  (unanimously  on the authority  of Ibn Umar)  
that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" used to 
touch  the Yemenite  corner  (at every  round  of circumambulatdon)  and then kiss it, 
and place his cheek  on it. Whoever  likes to restrict  kissing  to the Stone,  and 
satisfy  with touching  the Yemenite  Corner,  it will be sufficient.
The fifth is that when  he completes  the seven  rounds  of circumambuladon,  
let him come to the Multazam,  a place which  lies in between  the (Black)  Stone  
and the door,  and it is the place  where  the invocations  receive  answer  (from  Allah  
Almighty),  and then attach  himself  to the (walls of the) House  and hang in the 
curtains,  and let his abdomen  stick to the House,  and then let him place his right  
cheek  on it, and spread  out both his arms and hands  on it and say: "O Allah,  the 
Lord of the Ancient  House:  release  my neck (and body) from the fire (of Hell);  
save me from (the evil of) Satan,  the despised;  and save me from every kind of 
evil; and make me satisfied  with whatever  sustenance  You have provided  me 
with;  and bless me in what  You have  given  me. O Allah!  this House  is Yours;  and 
this servant  (meaning  himself)  is Yours;  and this is the station  of such as seeks  
refuge  with You from the fire (of Hell).  O Allah!  make  me among  the dearest  of 
Your delegate  to You."  Then,  let him praise  Allah so much in this place,  and 
invoke  for Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon  His Messenger  "Peace  be upon  him",  
and upon all the Messengers;  and then invoke  for all of his own needs,  and ask 
for forgiveness  of all of his sins. One of the early righteous  men used to say to his 
freed slaves  in this place:  "Move  aside from me so that I would  be able to confess  
to my Lord of my sins."
The sixth  is that when  he finishes  from that, let him offer  a two-rak'ah  prayer  
behind  the Station,  and recite in the first the Surah of Al-Kafirun,  and in the 
second the Surah of Al-Ikhlas;  and this is the two-rak'ah  prayer of 
circumambulation.  According  to Az-Zuhri,  it is out of the sunnah  that one 
should  offer a two-rak'ah  prayer  after every  seven-round  circumambulation.  But 
if he joins many seven-round  circumambulations,  and then offers  a two-rak'ah  
prayer  after  all of them,  it will be permissible.  As such did the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him". Every  seven rounds  constitute  a full 
circumambulation.
After the two-rak'ah  prayer  of circumambulation,  let him supplicate  with  
the following  supplication:  "O Allah!  make  easy for me the path to bliss, and 
keep me away from the way to distress;  and forgive  for me in the hereafter  
and in the world,  and save me by Your | Grace  so that I would  not disobey  
You; and help me obey You with (the aid of) Your Guidance;  and keep me 
away from committing  sins and mistakes;  and make  me one of those  who love  
You and love Your  angels  and Messengers,  and love Your  righteous  and pious  
servants.  O Allah! make me lovable  to Your angels,  Messengers  and Your  
righteous  pious servants.  O Allah! as You guided  me to Islam, make483
me


Page 486:
484 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
constantly  firm on it, through  Your Grace  and Care, and use me in Your  
obedience,  and the obedience  of Your Messenger;  and deliver  me from the 
misleading  afflictions."
Then,  let him return  to the (Black)  Stone  to touch  it and thus conclude  his 
circumambulation.  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" said (according  to the narration  of At-Tirmidhi,  An-Nasa'i  and Ibn Majah  
on the authority  of Ibn Umar): "He, who performs  a seven-round  
circumambulation  round  the House,  after  which  he offers  a two-rak'ah  prayer  will 
have  as much  reward  as is equal  to that of emancipating  a slave."
This is the way of performing  circumambulation,  and the duties  which  should  
be observed  in it, after the conditions  of prayer  are to complete  seven  circuits  of 
circumambulation  round  the whole  House;  to start with the Black  Stone,  making  
the House  to his left side; to circumambulate  inside  the mosque,  but outside  the 
House  itself,  but not on the fountain,  nor inside  the Hijr; to do the seven  rounds  
continuously  and not interruptedly  with breaks  between  them  other  than what  is 
usual.  What  is beyond  that are but customs  and forms.
The Fifth Subsection:
On Compassing  Safa And Marwah  Round
When  one finishes  from circumambulation,  let him come  out of the door of 
Safa,  which  lies opposite  to the side between  the Yemenite  Corner  and the Stone.  
When he comes  out of that door and reaches  the mountain  of Safa, let him 
ascend  its grades,  as high from its base as is the height  of a man. the Messenger  
of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" ascended  (the mount  of Safa)  
as high until the Ka'bah  seemed  to him (according  to the narration  of Muslim  on 
the authority  of Jabir).  To begin  the compassing  from the base of the mount  of 
Safa is sufficient,  but this addition  is desirable.  But since some of those grades  
have been renovated,  one should  not leave  them  behind  him with the result  that 
his compassing  would  not be complete.
When  one starts from here, let him compass  Safa and Marwah  round  seven  
times.  On his ascending  the Safa mount,  let him face the Ka'bah  and say: "Allah  
is Greater!  Allah  is Greater!  Praise  be to Allah for What  He has guided  us! Praise  
be to Allah  with all of His Praises.  There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah,  
with Whom  there is no partner.  His is the dominion,  and to Him is the praise,  
and with His Hand  is the good,  and He has power  over all things."  There  is no 
god but Allah,  the One and Only, Who has proved  true to His Promise,  and 
helped  His servant,  and made strong  His soldiers,  and has Alone  defeated  the 
confederates.  There  is no god but Allah,  to Whom  we are sincere  in faith, even  
against  the will of the unbelievers.  There  is no god but Allah,  to Whom  we are 
sincere  in faith. Praise  be to Allah,  the Lord of the worlds.  ‘Glory  be to Allah  
when you reach eventide  and when you rise in the morning;  Yea, to Him be 
praise,  in the heavens  and on earth;  and in the late afternoon  and when  the day


Page 487:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage
begins  to decline.  It is He Who brings  out the living  from the dead, and brings  
out the dead from the living,  and Who  gives life to the earth after it is dead: and 
thus shall you be brought  out (from  the dead).  Among  His Signs  is this, that He 
created  you from dust; and then, behold,  you are men scattered  (far and wide)!”  
(Ar-Rum  17:20)
A. SfS *kj ^ O? O1 Cr?3 ^fS485
O Allah! I ask You (to grant me) a permanent  faith and a truthful  certainty,  
and a tongue  which  is celebrating  (Your  Praises);  and I ask You (to grant me) 
forgiveness,  power,  and constant  peace in this world and the hereafter."  After  
that, let him invoke  for Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon  Muhammad  "Peace  be 
upon  him",  and invoke  Allah  for such of his needs  as he likes.
After that, let him come  down  and start the compassing,  while supplicating:  
"O (Allah)  my Lord!  Forgive  (for me my sins) and bestow  mercy  upon  me; anr 
overlook  (such  of sins as) You know:  Verily  you are most  Exalted  in Honour  an* 
Power,  Most  Bounteous.  O Allah!  grant  us a good  deed in this world,  and a gooa  
deed in the hereafter,  and save us from the punishment  of the fire (of Hell)."  
Then,  let him walk quietly  undl he reaches  the green slope, which  is the first 
pordon  he meets  once he comes  down  from the mount  of Safa which  lies at the 
corner  of the Sacred  mosque.  When there remain  only six cubits  between  him 
and the opposite  of the slope, let him go on walking  at a quick pace until he 
reaches  the two green slopes,  and returns  once again to the normal  walking.  
When  he reaches  the Marwah  mount,  let him ascend  it in the same  way as he has 
ascended  Safa, and then turn with his face to Safa and supplicate  with the same  
supplication  (with which  he has supplicated  on Safa mount).  In this way, he will 
have completed  only a single  round  of compassing.  The second  round  completes  
when he returns  to Safa and so on. He should  then repeat  that seven times,  
walking  at a quick pace at the place where  he should  do so every time, and 
walking  quietly  at the place where  he should  do so every time; ascending  both  
Safa and Marwah  mounts  Every  turn.
Once  he does so, he will have completed  the circumambulation  of arrival  and 
his compassing  Safa and Marwah  round;  and both are out of the tradition.  
Performing  ablution  is desirable  but not binding  for compassing,  unlike the 
circumambulation.  When  he performs  the compassing,  he might not repeat  it 
once again after standing  (at Arafah),  and rather  let him be satisfied  with it as a 
pillar, for it is not necessary  for compassing  to be performed  after standing  (at 
Arafat),  as it is for the circumambulation,  which  is an essential  pillar  of Hajj, even  
though it is requisite for any compassing  to be performed  after  
circumambulation,  whatever  it might  be.


Page 488:
486 The quarter  of the acts of worship
The Sixth  Subsection:
On Standing  And What  Precedes  It
If the performer  of Hajj reaches  Arafah  on the day of Arafah  (ninth  of Dhul-  
Hijjah),  let him first devote  himself  to performing  the circumambulation  of 
arrival and entering  Mecca. But if he reaches  many days before that, and 
performs  the circumambulation  of arrival,  let him remain  in the state of Ihram  
until the seventh  day of Dhul-Hijjah.  After  noon  prayer  of that day, the imam  in 
Mecca  delivers  a speech  at the Ka'bah,  in which  he orders  the people  to get ready  
to set out to Mina  on the day of Tarwiyah  (eighth  of Dhul-Hijjah),  and spend  the 
night  there,  and then come  out therefrom  very early to Arafah  (on the ninth of 
Dhul-Hijjah),  in order  to establish  the obligation  of standing  after the decline  of 
the sun, since the time of standing  ranges  from the decline  of the sun until the 
rise of the true dawn  of the day of Sacrifice.
On the other  hand,  he should  come  out to Mina  while  reciting  Talbiyah,  and it 
is desirable  for him to walk on foot from Mecca  to do his ceremonies  until the 
end of his Hajj, if it is within  the reach  of his power.  To walk on foot from the 
mosque  of Abraham  "Peace  be upon  him" to the place  of standing  (of Arafah)  is 
more excellent  and better  confirmed.  Once he reached  Mina, let him say: "O 
Allah! this is Mina: bestow  upon me the same as You bestowed  upon Your  
devotees  and those  who obey You."  Let him spend  that night  at Mina,  and it is 
only a place of rest, to which no ceremonies  are attached.  When  it was the 
morning  of the day of Arafah,  let him first offer the Morning  prayer,  and when  
the sun rises on the mount  of Thabir,  let him start  moving  towards  Arafat,  saying:  
"O Allah!  make  this the best early  journey  I've ever done,  and make  it the closest  
to (obtain)  Your Good Pleasure,  and the farthest  from (incurring)  Your  
displeasure.  O Allah!  it is to You that I've gone  very early;  and it is You in Whom  
I hope;  and it is upon  You on Whom  I rely; and it is Your Countenance  that I 
intend:  make  me among  those  of whom  You are proud  today  before  such as are 
better  and superior  to me."
When  he reaches  Arafah,  let him pitch his tent at Namirah,  near the mosque,  
for it is in the same  place that the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon  him" pitched  his (according  to the narration  of Muslim  on the authority  
of Jabir).  Namirah  is a place at the bottom  of Urnah,  outside  the standing  place  
and also outside  of Arafah.  Let him take bath for standing  (at Arafah).  Once  the 
sun declines  (and passes  the meridian)  the imam delivers  a brief sermon,  after  
which  he sits down,  and gives  room  for the Mu'adhdhin  to pronounce  the Call to 
Noon  prayer.  Then the imam  delivers  his second  sermon,  and the Mu'adhdhin  
joins the pronouncement  of prayer  establishment  (Iqamah)  with the call to prayer  
(Adhan);  and die imam  finishes  (his second  sermon)  just with the Mu'adhdhin's  
concluding  the Iqamah.  The imam then combines  both Zhuhr  (noon)  and Asr 
(afternoon)  prayers  with a single  Adhan  and two Iqamahs,  in which  he shortens  
the prayer  (i.e. reduces  each from  four to two rak'ahs).
Then,  when  he (finishes  from prayer  and) goes to the standing  place,  let him 
stand  at Arafah,  and not at the valley  of Urnah.  As for the mosque  of Abraham


Page 489:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage  
"Peace  be upon  him"  its front  portion  lies in the valley  of Urnah,  while  its back in 
Arafah.  So, if one stands  at the front  portion  of the mosque,  his standing  will not 
be effective.  However,  the (standing  place of) Arafah  is separated  from the 
mosque  by big rocks  which  are spread  out there.  The best here is to stand near  
those  rocks,  near the imam,  facing  the Qiblah  in case he is riding.  Such being  the 
case, let him devote  himself  to the celebration  of the several  kinds of Tahmid,  
Tasbih,  demonstrating  the Allah ’s Oneness,  giving  thanks  to Allah Almighty,  
supplication  and repentance.
On that day, let him observe  no fast, in order to be powerful  enough  to 
continue  his invocations  and supplications.  Let not him also interrupt  his 
recitation  of the wording  of Talbiyah  on the Day of Arafah:  but it is rather  
desirable  to recite  Talbiyah  once, and turn to supplication  and invocation  once,  
and so on. He should  not depart  from Arafah  except  after sunset,  in order to 
combine  both day and night  while  being  in Arafah;  and if it possible  for him to 
stand (at least) an hour on the eighth day (of Dhul-Hijjah),  when there is 
probability  of mistake  (about  the exact  day of the emergence  of) the new moon,  
it will be more prudent,  therewith  one shall become  more secure  from missing  
the standing.
But he, whom the standing  escapes  until the rise of dawn of the day of 
Sacrifice,  Hajj has indeed  escaped  him, and in this case, he should  put off Ihram  
(by doing)  the ceremonies  of Umrah,  and offer a blood  sacrifice  in recompense  
of missing  (Hajj),  and perform  Hajj in the coming  year in lieu (of that which  he 
has missed).  On that day, let him wholeheartedly  devoted  to invocations  and 
supplications,  for it is in the like of this very spot (of the land),  and among  this 
very assembly  (of pilgrims),  the answers  of invocations  and supplications  are 
expected.  The best to use in this connection  is the supplication  that is handed  
down  from  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him",  as 
well as from the early  righteous  pious  men: "There  is no god but Allah,  the One  
and Only, other than Whom  there is no partner:  His be the dominion,  and to 
Him be the praise.  It is He Who gives life, and it is He Who takes life by death,  
and He is Ever-Living,  Who never  dies. In His Hand  is good,  and He has power  
over  all things.  O Allah!  give me light  in my heart,  light in my hearing,  light in my 
sight,  and light in my tongue.  O Allah!  expand  my breast  for me, and make  easy  
for me my matter."
Let him say too: "O Allah,  Lord of Praise:  To You be the praise  as much  as 
You should  say, and better  than we say. To You do belong  my prayer,  my service,  
my life and my death  and to You be the end of my journey,  and from  You be my 
reward.  O Allah! I seek refuge  with You from the evil suspicions  of the breast  
and from the disparity  of the matter  and from the punishment  of the grave.  O 
Allah!  I seek refuge  with You from the evil of what  comes  at night  and from the 
evil of what  comes  by daylight,  and from the evil of what  is carried  by the winds,  
and from the evil of the misfortunes  of time. O Allah!  I seek refuge  with You487


Page 490:
488 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
from turning  the power  and health  given by You (from  me), from the sudden  
attack  of Your  Wrath,  and the whole  of Your Displeasure.  O Allah!  guide me 
with the right guidance,  and forgive  for me in the hereafter  and in this world:  O 
the best of such as invoked,  the Greatest  of such as called upon, the Most  
Generous  of such as petitioned:  give me, this evening,  the best of what  You have  
ever given any of Your creatures,  and the pilgrims  of Your House:  O Most  
Merciful  of those  who show  mercy.  O Allah,  Most  fitting  for the highest  degrees,  
the grantor  of blessing,  the Creator  of both earths  and heavens:  all voices  have  
cried out to You in different  languages,  asking  You their needs,  and my Need  
from You is that You should  not forget me in the abode of trial, when the 
inhabitants  of this world  forget  me. O Allah!  verily  You hear my speech,  see my 
place,  know  my secret  and public  matters,  and nothing  of my affairs  is hidden  
from  You: I'm the miserable  poor,  who seek relief  and shelter,  who fears and is 
scared,  who confesses  of all of his sins: I ask You in the same way as a needy  
indigent  asks You, and implore  to You in the same way as a sinful humiliated  
does,  and supplicate  You in the same  as a fearful  blind  does,  with the invocation  
and supplication  of such as whose  neck submits  to You, his tears are shed to 
You, his body  is mortified  to You, and his nose is disgraced  for You. O Allah!  
make  me not wretched  by invoking  You, and be compassionate  and merciful  to 
me, O best of those  who hear supplications  and best of those  who bestow.  O 
Allah! Though  some may praise themselves  before  You, I will blame myself  
before  You. O my God, the sins have made my tongue  silent and I have no 
means (to perform  good) deeds,  and no intercessor  except  hope. My God, I 
know that because  of my sins I no longer  have any standing  with You, nor is 
there any ground  for excuse.  But You are the Most Generous  of the generous.  
My God,  if I
me, for Your  mercy  encompasses  all things,  and I am a thing.  My God, though  
my sins are grave,  they are small  as compared  with Your  pardon,  so forgive  them  
O Most  Generous  One. My God,  You are You and I am I; I persist  in sin, and 
You persist  in forgiveness.  My God,  if You do not have mercy  except  on those  
who obey  You,  to whom  shall sinners  betake  themselves?  My God,  I intentionally  
have  avoided  Your  obedience  and have gone straight  into disobedience.  Glory  be 
to You. How  irrefutable  is Your  argument  against  me, and how generous  is Your  
pardon  forward  me! By the decisiveness  of Your argument  against  me and the 
futility  of my argument  against  You, by my need for You and Your  lack of need  
for me, forgive  me O Best of those  who are called  upon by any petitioner,  and 
Most  Gracious  of those  who are besought  by any solicitor.  By the sacredness  of 
Islam and the guarantee  of Muhammad  - (the Blessing  and Peace of God be 
upon  him) — I beseech  You to forgive  me all my sins and send me from this place  
of standing  with my needs  granted.  Bestow  upon me what I ask and fulfill my 
hope in accordance  with that I desire.  My God, I have prayed  to You with thenot suited  to reach  Your mercy,  Your  mercy  is suited  to reach am


Page 491:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage
prayer  that you have taught  me, so do not censure  me from the hope  which  You  
have instilled  in me. My God,  what  will You do this evening  with a servant  who  
confessed  to you his sins, submitted  to You in humiliation,  yielded  (to You) his 
body,  humiliated  himself  before  You because  of his (bad) deeds,  repented  to You  
(of such deeds),  asking  You to forgive  his transgression,  beseeching  You to 
pardon  him, seeking  from  You the satisfacdon  of his needs,  hoping  in You in this 
place  of standing  despite  the multitude  of his sins. O shelter  for every  living  thing  
and friend  of every  believer;  whoever  does  well,  obtains  Your  mercy  and whoever  
transgresses,  perishes  in his transgression.  O Allah!  To You we come  and in Your  
open  place  we dismount;  and to You alone  we look and Your  favour  we seek and 
to Your  beneficence  we expose  ourselves.  We hope for Your  compassion  and we 
fear Your  punishment.  To You we fall with the burden  of (our) sins and to Your  
Sacred  House  we woke Pilgrimage.  O You Who possess  all that is needed  by 
(Your)  supplicants,  You Who know  the thoughts  of the silent.  O You Who have  
no other  Lord to be petitioned  and beyond  Whom  there  is no other  creator  to be 
feared.  O You Who have no vizier to be consulted  and no chamberlain  to be 
bribed.  O You Who do not respond  to the accumulated  petitions  except  with  
bounty  and excellence,  and do not provide  for the great quantity  of needs but 
with favour  and charity.  O Allah!  You have appointed  hospitality  for every  guest,  
and we are Your  guests;  so let our hospitality  from You be Paradise.  O Allah!  
there  is recompense  for every  delegate,  and bounty  for every  visitor,  and a gift for 
every petitioner,  and fulfillment  for all who hope, and satisfaction  for all who  
request  that which  is in Your  possession,  and mercy  for all who seek mercy,  and 
nearness  (to You) for all who desire  You, and pardon  for all who implore.  O 
Allah!  We have come to Your Sacred  House  and stood at these great religious  
(places)  of ceremony  and attended  these great shrines  hoping  for Your favour.  
Do not make  us to be disappointed.  Our God,  You have blessed  (us) repeatedly  
so that (our) souls have grown  confident  of the continuous  flowing  of Your  
blessing,  and You have brought  forth examples  (for our consideration)  until  
(even) the speechless  things have contended  on Your behalf,  and You have  
disclosed  Your Grace  until Your friends  confessed  their falling  short of Your  
truth, and You have revealed  many signs that even the heavens  and the earth  
have eloquently  advanced  as proof  (of Your Word),  and You have overcome  
(everything)  with Your  Might  until everything  has submitted  to Your  Power,  and 
all faces have been humble  before  Your Grandness.  If Your servants  displease  
You, you forbear  and give respite;  and if they do well, You then show favour  
toward  them and accept  them;  and if they disobey  You, You conceal  (it); and if 
they commit  sins, You pardon  and forgive;  and if they call (upon  You), You  
Listen;  and if we call, You hear;  and if we come  to You,  You draw  near;  and if we 
turn away from You, You call (us back).  Our Lord,  You say in Your  Book  (the 
Qur'an)  to Muhammad  the Seal of the Prophets:  " Say to the Unbelievers,  if489


Page 492:
490 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
(now)  they desist  (from  unbelief),  their past would  be forgiven  them;  but if they  
persist,  the punishment  of those  before  them  is already  (a matter  of warning  for 
them)"  (Al-Anfal:  38)
So the espousal  of the confession  of Allah's  Oneness,  after (a former  state  
of) unbelief,  satisfied  You. We humbly  bear witness  to (Your)  Oneness,  and 
we sincerely,  (bear  witness)  to the Aposdeship  of Muhammad,  So forgive  us 
of previous  sins because  of this witness  and let not our share  in (Islam)  be less 
than the share of those  who embraces  Islam (after  us). Our God, You have  
encouraged  (people  to) approach  You by setting free what they have  
possessed  (i.e. their slaves);  now we are Your slaves and You are the most  
entided  to bestow  favour;  set us free; and You have ordered  us to give alms to 
our poor,  and we are Your  poor and You are the most entitled  to extend  (of 
Your  bounty),  therefore  give alms to us; and You have enjoined  us to forgive  
all who do injustice  to us; now we have done injustice  to ourselves,  and You  
are the most entitled  to act generously;  therefore,  forgive  us. Our Lord,  
forgive  us, have mercy  on us, You are our Master.  Our Lord,  grant  us good  
deed in this world and good deed in the hereafter,  and save us from the 
torment  of the Fire."
Furthermore,  let him supplicate  so much  with the supplication  of Al-Khadir  
"Peace  be upon  him",  which  goes as follows:  "O (Lord)  Whom  no matter  or state  
could  divert  from  the other,  nor could  a hearing  divert  Him from  another,  and by 
no means  could sounds  and voices  be indistinguishable  in His Sight. O (Lord)  
Who  are not distracted  by prolific  appeals,  nor could  all languages  differ  for Him.  
O You Who are never vexed by the insistence  of those who beg you 
importunately,  and Who  are never  annoyed  by the appeal  of those  who appeal  to 
You, allow  us to know  the coolness  of Your  pardon  and the sweetness  of Your  
discourse."
Then,  let him invoke  with whatever  supplication  seems  to him, and ask for 
Allah's  Forgiveness  for himself,  his parents  and for all of the Muslims  and 
faithful  believers,  their male and female.  Let him persist  in invocation  and 
make much of the appeal,  since nothing  could be regarded  as much in the 
Sight of Allah Almighty.  It is narrated  that Mutarrif  Ibn Abdullah  said while  
he was (standing)  at Arafah:  "O Allah!  reject  not all (of those  pilgrims)  just for 
my sake."  According  to Bakr Al-Muzani:  A man said: I cast a glance  of the 
pilgrims  of Arafah,  and thought  that their sins would  have been forgiven  had I 
not been among  them."
The Seventh  Subsection:
The Remaining  Acts Of Hajj After  Standing
This includes  spending  the night (at Muzdalifah),  slaughtering  sacrifice,  
throwing  (of  Jamrahs),  getting  the head shaved,  and (Ifadah)  circumambulation.
If one pours  down  from  Arafah  (at a quick  pace) after the setting  of the sun,


Page 493:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage  
he should  adhere  to quietness,  tranquility  and reverence,  avoiding  the agitation  of 
horses and instigation  of camels as some people  use to do. However,  the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" forbade  the 
agitation  of horses  and instigation  of camels  and said (according  to the narration  
of An-Nasa'i  on the authority  of Usamah  Ibn Zaid): "Fear  Allah,  and proceed  
quietly  with tranquility,  so that you should  not trample  a weak one, nor cause  
harm  to a Muslim."  (Verily,  it is not righteous  to instigate  mounts).  If he reaches  
Muzdalifah,  let him take bath for it, because  Muzdalifah  is a part of the 
Sanctuary,  which  one should  enter  after bathing;  and if he could,  let him enter  it 
on foot, for this is much  better  and closer  to showing  respect  and dignity  to the 
Sanctuary.  While being on the way, he should  keep rising his voice with the 
wording  of Talbiyah.
When  he reaches  it let him say: "O Allah!  this is Muzdalifah,  in which  different  
tongues  (of different  kinds of people)  have gathered  in order to ask You their  
several  needs:  make me then of those who invoke  you and You answer  their  
invocations,  put their trust  in You and You suffice  them."  Then,  let him combine  
both  Maghrib  and Isha' prayers  in Muzdalifah,  at the time of Isha',  shortening  the 
prayer,  by a single  Adhan  and two Iqamahs,  with no supererogatory  prayer  to be 
offered  between  both. But he might  combine  the supererogatory  prayers  of both  
in addition  to Witr prayers  after offering  both obligatory  prayers,  beginning  with  
the supererogatory  prayer  of Maghrib  prayers,  and then that of Isha' prayer,  
according  to their normal  sequence.  Verily,  to leave offering  the supererogatory  
prayers  during  journey  is an evident  loss; and the commitment  to offer these  
(prayers)  at fixed times  is very harmful  and it cancels  out their subordination  to 
the obligatory  prayers.  If it is permissible,  with a single  Tayammum,  to offer the 
supererogatory  prayers  together  with obligatory  ones according  to the rule of 
subordination,  it is then more fitting  to permit  one to perform  them collectively  
in accordance  with the rule of subordination.  This is not negated  by the fact that 
the supererogatory  prayer  differs from the obligatory  one in that it may be 
offered  while one is on the riding mount,  because  of what we have already  
pointed  out with respect  to subordination  and need.
Then,  let him spend  that night  at Muzdalifah,  and it is a ceremonial  lodging.  
So, he , who comes  out of it during  the first half of the night  and does not spend  
the night there has to offer a blood-sacrifice;  and giving  life to this honoured  
night (through  lighting  up lamps)  is of the best religious  services  for such as 
could afford  for it. when it is midnight,  one should  get ready for setting  out, 
taking  pebbles  with him, for it (Muzdalifah)  has smooth  pebbles.  Let him take as 
many  as seventy  pebbles,  and this is sufficient  for the need.  But there  is no harm  
to take more,  for some  pebbles  might  fall from him. Let the pebbles  be too light  
to be carried  by the fingertips.  Let him then offer the Morning  prayer  when  it is 
still very dark, and begin proceeding,  until when he reaches the Sacred  
Monument,  which  is the furthest  end of Muzdalifah,  let him stop and engage  
himself  in supplication  until it is clear: "O Allah! by the right of the Sacred491


Page 494:
492 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
Monument;  the Sacred  month;  the Sacred  House;  the Corner  (of the Black  Stone)  
and the Station  (of Abraham):  convey  to the spirit of Muhammad  from us 
greeting  and peace;  admit  us to the abode  of peace,  O (Allah)  Lord of Majesty,  
Glory  and Honour."  Then,  before  the rising  of the sun, let him depart  from it 
until  he reaches  a place  called  the valley  of Muhassir,  where  it is desirable  for him 
to motivate  his riding  mount  to be quick  in pace until he cuts the breadth  of this 
valley;  and if he is walking  on foot,  let him quicken  his pace.
When  it is the morning  of the day of Sacrifice,  let him mix the words  of 
Talbiyah  with those of Takhir, ; in such a way as to recite Talbiyah  once, and 
glorify  (Allah)  once until he reaches  Mina where  there lie the three places  of 
Jamrahs.  Let him go beyond  the first and the second,  for he has nothing  to do 
with them on the Day of Sacrifice  until he reaches  the Jamrah  of Aqabah,  which  
is situated  on the right side of the front  part of the Qiblah  on the main road,  and 
the place  of throwing  is high a bit at the slope  of the mountain,  even though  it is 
clear  in view of the places  of  Jamrahs.  Let him throw  the Jamrah  of Aqabah  after  
the sun rises as high as a lance.
The proper  way to do so is to stand  in the face of the Qiblah,  but if he stands  
facing  the Jamrah,  the will be no harm.  Then,  let him throw  seven  pebbles  while  
raising  his hand,  substituting  Takbir  for Talbiyah.  After  throwing  each pebble,  let 
him say: "Allah  is Greater  for the obedience  of (Allah)  Most Gracious,  and the 
humiliation  of Satan. O Allah! (I throw  this Jamrah)  out of believing  in Your  
Book, and following  the sunnah  of Your Messenger."  'Once he finishes  from  
throwing,  let him then stop from reciting  Talbiyah  and Takbir. , barring  the Takbir  
s after every  obligatory  prayer  as of the Zhuhr  prayer  of the day of Sacrifice  until  
after the Morning  prayer  of the third day of Tashriq.  On that very day, he should  
not stop for supplication,  but rather  let him supplicate  in his dwelling  place.
Takbir goes as follows:  "Allah  is Greater;  Allah  is Greater;  Allah  is Greater;  
Allah  is Greater  with certainty;  and Praise  be to Allah so much;  and glorified  be 
Allah every  morning  and evening;  there is no god but Allah,  the One and Only,  
other  than Whom  there  is no partner;  we are sincere  to Him in faith even though  
against  the will of the unbelievers.  There  is no god but Allah,  the One and Only,  
Who has proved  true to His Promise,  and helped  His servant,  and made  strong  
His soldiers,  and has Alone  defeated  the confederates.  There  is no god but Allah;  
and Allah  is Greater."  Then,  let him slaughter  his sacrificial  animal  if he has got 
one, and it is more fitting  for him to slaughter  by himself,  saying:  "In the Name  
of Allah;  and Allah  is Greater!  O Allah!  it is from You (I expect  reward),  in You  
(I have faith),  and to You (I offer my sacrifice):  accept  it from me in the same  
way as You accepted  from  Your  Bosom  Friend  Abraham  "Peace  be upon  him".
Offering  a camel as sacrifice  is better,  then a cow, and then a sheep,  and a 
sheep (for one) is better than to have six join in a camel or a cow; and the 
sacrifice  of a ram is better  than a goat. In this context,  the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said (according  to the narration  of Abu


Page 495:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage  
Dawud  on the authority  of Ubadah  Ibn As-Samit,  and At-Tirmidhi  on the 
authority  of Abu Umamah):  "The best of sacrifice  is the horned  ram; and the 
white is better than the dusty black."  According  to Abu Hurairah,  the white  
(among  animals)  is better  for sacrifice  than the blood  of two blacks  (i.e. grey and 
black)."  Let him eat of it if it is a voluntary  sacrifice.  On the other  hand,  let him 
not make  a sacrifice  with any lame, maimed,  cropped-eared,  mangy,  perforated ­
eared,  or emaciated  (animals).
Then, he should  get his head shaved.  It is out of the sunnah  to face the 
Qiblah,  and start  with the front  part of his head,  and shave  the right  side until the 
two prominent  bones  which  go down  to die nape,  and then shave  the remaining  
of it, while saying:  "O Allah!  By every  hair, record  for me a good deed,  plot out 
of me a sin, and upgrade  me a degree  in Your  Presence."  The women  should  cut 
short  her hair, and it is desirable  for a bald to pass the razor  upon  his head.
Once  he got his head shaved  after throwing  the Jamrah  (of Aqabah),  the first 
desacralizadon  will have occurred,  and all taboos  become  lawful  for him, barring  
(the approach  of) women  and catching  (games).  Then,  let him set out to Mecca,  
and perform  the circumambuladon  (of Ifadah)  in the same manner  we have  
described  earlier,  and this circumambuladon  is one of the pillars  of Hajj; and it is 
called  the circumambuladon  of visit. Its due time begins  after midnight  of the day 
of Sacrifice,  and the best dme to perform  it is the day of Sacrifice.  However,  
there is no dme limit for its ending,  and it might  be delayed  to any time, but ir 
this case, he should  keep himself  bound  to the state of Ihram.  Women  remain  
unlawful  for him until he finishes  from this circumambuladon;  and once he 
performs  it, the second  desacralizadon  will have occurred,  and thus sexual  
intercourse  will become  lawful  for him, since by so doing  Ihram  will have come  
to its end; and there remain  only the throwing  (of Jamrahs)  during  the days of 
Tashriq,  and spending  in Mina,  and both are dudes  to be fulfilled  after  putting  off 
Ihram,  by way of following  the truth.
The way to perform  this circumambuladon  with the two-rak'ah  prayer  after it 
is the same as we have described  of the circumambuladon  of arrival.  When  he 
finishes  from circumambuladon,  let him compass  Safa and Marwah  round,  in the 
same manner  we have described,  in case he did not do that after the 
circumambuladon  of arrival;  and if he did it (after the circumambuladon  of 
arrival),  the pillar should  have occurred,  and there is no necessity  for repeating  it 
(after  the circumambuladon  of visit).
The causes  of desacralizadon  are three: throwing  (the Jamrahs),  getting  the 
head shaved,  and circumambuladon  (of visit) which  constitutes  an essential  rite 
(pillar).  If he achieves  two of those  three,  he will have accomplished  one of both  
desacralizations.  There  is no blame  on him not to follow  a certain  sequence  in 
doing any of those three besides  slaughtering.  But it is better to throw (the 
pebbles)  first, then slaughter  (his sacrifice),  then get his head shaved,  then  
perform  circumambuladon.493


Page 496:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
As to the imam,  it is out of the sunnah  to deliver  his sermon  on that day after  
the decline  of the sun, and it was (on that day that) the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" delivered  the sermon  of his Farewell  
(Hajj according  to the narration  of Al-Bukhari  on the authority  of Abu Bakrah).  
Indeed,  there  are four sermons  to be delivered  in Hajj: the sermon  of the seventh  
day (of Dhul-Hijjah),  the sermon  of the day of Arafah,  the sermon  of the day of 
Sacrifice,  and the sermon  of the day of the first departure;  and all of them  should  
be delivered  after the decline  (of the sun); and each consists  of one speech,  
barring  that of the day of Arafah,  which  is of two speeches  with a sitting  for rest 
between  them.
When he (the pilgrim)  finishes  from circumambulation  (of visit), let him 
return  to Mina to stay there,  and throw  (the remaining  Jamrahs).  Let him spend  
that night  in Mina,  which  is called  the night  of settlement,  because  the people  will 
settle in Mina  in the morrow,  and leave it not. When  it is the morning  of the 
second  day of Id (eleventh  of Dhul-Hijjah),  and the sun passes  the meridian,  let 
him take bath for throwing  the Jamrah,  and goes directly  to the first  Jamrah  next  
to Arafah  mount;  and it lies on the right side of the main road. Let him throw  it 
with seven  pebbles.  When  he goes beyond  it, let him turn a bit rightward,  and 
stand facing  the Qiblah,  and praise  Allah  Almighty,  glorify  Allah,  and affirm  the 
Allah's Oneness,  and supplicate  with his heart attentive,  and his organs  
submissive.  Let him keep standing  with his face towards  the direction  of the 
Qiblah  as long as is equal to the recitation  of the Surah of Al-Baqarah,  during  
which  let him engage  himself  in supplication.
Then,  let him proceed  further  towards  the middle  Jamrah,  and throw  it in 
the same  way as he has thrown  the former,  and stand  as long as he has stood  
in the former.  Then,  let him proceed  further  towards  the Jamrah  of Aqabah,  
and throw it with seven pebbles,  but at this time, he should  not engage  
himself  in any business  and rather  he should  return  to his dwelling  place.  He 
then should  spend  that night  at Mina;  and this night  is called  the night  of the 
first departure.  When  he offers  Zhuhr  prayer  of the coming  day, which  is the 
second  day of Tashriq,  (i.e. the twelfth  of Dhul-Hijjah),  let him then throw  
(the three  Jamrahs  with) twenty-one  pebbles,  the same as he had done on the 
previous  day.
On that day, he has the freedom  to choose,  whether  to remain  at Mina or 
return  to Mecca.  If he comes  out of Mina  before  the setting  of the sun, there  will 
be no sin on him. But if he remains  until night,  it will be then impermissible  for 
him to come  out of Mina,  and rather  he should  remain  and spend  the night  there  
until he throws  on the day of the second  departure  (the three Jamrahs  with)  
twenty-one  pebbles,  the same as he did on the previous  two days. There  is a 
blood-sacrifice  to be offered  in compensation  for his leaving  the spending  of the 
night  and throwing;  and he should  give the meat in charity.  He has the right to 
visit the House  during  the nights  which  he spends  at Mina,  on the condition  that494


Page 497:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage
he should  not spend the night but at Mina, the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace be upon him" did so (according  to the narration  of Abu  
Dawud  on the authority  of Tawus  from  Ibn Abbas).
Furthermore,  he (the pilgrim)  should not be absent  from the obligatory  
prayers  (in congregation)  with the imam in the mosque  of Khaif, for its 
excellence  is very great. When  he departs  from Mina, let him first stay at (the 
valley of) Muhassab  at Mina, where he should  offer Asr, Maghrib  and Isha'  
prayers,  and have a nap there (according  to the narration  of Al-Bukhari  on the 
authority  of Anas).  This is in accordance  with the sunnah,  as handed  down  on the 
authority  of many  companions  "Allah  be pleased  with them".  But if he could  not 
do so, there  is no blame  on him.
The Eighth  Subsection:  On The Manner  Of Umrah  And What  
Follows  It To The Farewell  Circumambulation
Whoever  likes to perform  Umrah  (lesser  pilgrimage)  either  before  or after his 
Hajj (greater  pilgrimage),  let him do. Anyway,  let him (once  he intends  to do so) 
take bath and put on the garments  of Ihram,  as has been previously  described  in 
Hajj. Then,  let him assume  Ihram  for Umrah  from the proper  place fixed for 
assuming  Ihram;  and the best of places  is Ji'ranah,  then At-Tan'im,  then Al- 
Hudaibiyah.  Then, let him state his intention  to perform  Umrah,  go or 
reciting  Talbiyah,  and aim directly  at the mosque  of A'ishah  "Allah  be pleasec  
with her", in order  to offer a two-rak'ah  prayer,  and invoke  for whatever  he 
likes. After that he should  return  to Mecca  while reciting  Talbiyah  until he 
enters  the Sacred  House.  Once he enters  the Sacred  House,  he should  stop  
from reciting  Talbiyah,  and engage himself  in circumambulation,  which  
should  consist  of seven rounds,  and then compass  Safa and Marwah  round  
seven  times  as we have described  earlier.  When  he finishes  from both,  let him 
get his head shaved  and thus his Umrah  will have been  complete.
The residents  of Mecca  are strongly  recommended  to perform  Umrah  and 
circumambulation  (round  the House)  very frequently,  and cool his eye with the 
Sacred  House  so much;  and if he enters it, let him offer a two-rak'ah  prayer  
between  both pillars,  for this is much  better.  Let him enter  it as barefooted,  with  
signs of reverence  and veneration.  Once,  it was said to one of them:  "Have  you 
entered  the House  of your Lord today?"  he said: "By Allah!  I do not think  those  
feet fitting  for circumambulation  round the House  of my Lord: how should  I 
think  they are fitting  for me to tread  therewith  the House  of my Lord,  and I have  
known  where  they were walking?"  moreover,  let him drink  as much  as he could  
from the water  of Zamzam,  and it is better  to drink  by himself,  and not through  
anyone  else if it is possible,  and let him quench  his thirst  to the full, while  saying:  
"O Allah!  make  it a remedy  for every  ailment  and sickness,  and bestow  upon  me 
sincerity,  certainty  (of faith), power and health in both this world and the 
hereafter.  In this context,  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon him" said (according  to the narration  of Ibn Majah  on the authority  of495


Page 498:
496 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
Jabir):  "The water  of Zamzam  acts (as remedy)  for that for which  it is drunk."  
This means  that it cures  such of ailments  as is intended  by drinking  it.
The Ninth  Subsection:
On The Farewell  Circumambulation
When  it seems  to the pilgrim  to return  to his homeland,  after finishing  from  
his Hajj and Umrah,  let him first accomplish  his occupations,  and prepare  his 
baggage  making  the last of his occupation  to bid farewell  to the House  by 
performing  a Circumambulation  of seven  rounds,  as previously  (described  in the 
other two circumambulations),  but without  walking  at a quick  pace (during  the 
first three rounds)  nor rearranging  his upper garment  to uncover  the right  
shoulder.  When  he finishes  from  it, let him offer  a two-rak'ah  prayer  behind  the 
Station  (of Abraham),  drink  from  the water  of Zamzam  (as much  as he could),  go 
to Multazam,  and devote himself  to imploration  and invocation  of Allah  
Almighty  as follows:
"O Allah!  this House  is Yours;  and this servant  (in reference  to himself)  is 
Yours,  the son of Your  Servant  and Your  female-slave:  You have carried  me on 
such of Your creatures  as You have subjugated  to me, and led me in Your  
countries  and brought  me, by Your  Grace  (to Your  House)  and helped  me fulfill  
Your  ceremonies.  If You have been pleased  with me, affirm  Your  Good  Pleasure  
with me; otherwise,  be pleased  with me now before  I leave  Your  House.  It is time  
for my departure,  by Your  Permission,  with no substitute  for You, nor for Your  
House,  and with rejecting  neither  You nor Your  House.  O Allah!  endow  me with  
health  and power  in my body, and protection  in my faith, and make good my 
returning,  and help me obey  You as long as You cause  me to survive,  and join to 
me the good of both this world and the hereafter:  You have power  over all 
things.  O Allah!  make  not it the last (visit) for me to Your  Sacred  House,  and in 
case You do make it the last (visit) for me to it, admit  me to the Garden  in 
recompense."  It is more desirable  for him not to turn his sight from the House  
until  it disappears  from  him.“
=
s
The Tenth  Subsection:
On The Visit To Medina  And Its Proprieties
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said 
(according  to the narration  of At-Tabarani  and Ad-Daraqatni  on the authority  
of Ibn Umar):  "He, who visits me after my death seems as if he visited  me 
during  my lifetime."  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon him" further  said (according  to the narration  of Ibn Abd, Ad-Daraqatni  
and Ibn Hibban  from Malik  on the authority  of Ibn Umar):  "He, who finds a 
plenty  of time (after  or before  his ceremonies)  and even though  he does not 
visit me (in Medina  will be regarded  to) have desertion  towards  me." the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" also said 
(according  to the narration  of At-Tabarani  on the authority  of Ibn Umar):  "He,  
who comes to visit me, and he is mainly  concerned  with visiting  me, it is


Page 499:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage  
incumbent  upon  Allah  Almighty  to accept  my intercession  for him (on the Day  
of  Judgement)."
Whoever  intends  to visit Medina,  let him invoke  so much  Allah's  prayer  and 
blessing  upon  the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him" on the way. Once  his 
sight falls upon the walls and trees of Medina,  let him say: "O Allah!  this is the 
Sanctuary  of Your  Messenger:  make  it a protection  for me from the fire (of Hell),  
a safety  from punishment  and the evil of reckoning."  Before  he enters,  let him 
take bath from the well of Harrah  and put on the cleanest  dress he has got, and 
apply  perfume  to his body;  and when  he enters  it, let him enter  humbly,  showing  
veneradon  to it, and say: "In the Name  of Allah;  and on the cult of the Messenger  
of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" (I enter  Medina):  O my Lord!  
let my entry be by the Gate of Truth  and Honour,  and likewise  my exit by the 
Gate  of Truth  and Honour;  and grant  me from  Your  Presence  an authority  to aid 
(me)."  (Al-Isra ’ 80)497
c S'", , ri
4 L'JaL y dill  JJ
Then,  let him aim at the mosque  to enter,  and offer  a two-rak'ah  prayer  by the 
side of the pulpit,  making  the pole of the pulpit  alongside  his right shoulder,  and 
face the pillar  beside  which  the box lies, in such a way as to have the circle  which  
is on the wall of the Qiblah  of the mosque  in between  his eyes. This is the same  
position  of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him"  
before  the features  of the mosque  were changed.  Let him endeavour  to pray in 
the original  (area of the) mosque  before  the inclusion  of the additional  area in the 
mosque.  Then,  let him come to the grave of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him" and stand  by its face,  i.e. to turn his back to the 
Qiblah  and face the wall of the grave,  as long as nearly  four cubits  far from the 
pillar  which  is in the angle  of the wall of the grave,  and make  the chandelier  over  
his head.
It is not out of the sunnah  to touch  the wall of the grave,  nor to kiss it: on the 
contrary,  to stand  at a short  distance  from it is closer  to respect  and veneration.  
Let him stand  and say: "Peace  be upon  you O Messenger  of Allah!  Peace  be upon  
you O Prophet  of Allah!  peace be upon  you O trustworthy  of Allah!  Peace  be 
upon  you O sweetheart  of Allah!  Peace  be upon  you O the select  of Allah!  Peace  
be upon you O good choice  of Allah!  peace  be upon you O Ahmad!  Peace  be 
upon  you O Muhammad!  Peace  be upon  you O Abu Al-Qasim!  Peace  be upon  
you O Eraser  (of unbelief)!  Peace  be upon  you O final (Prophet)!  Peace  be upon  
you O gatherer!  Peace  be upon  you O announcer  of good  tidings!  Peace  be upon  
you O Warner!  Peace  be upon  you O purity!  Peace  be upon  you O pure!  Peace  be 
upon  you O most  generous  of mankind!  Peace  be upon  you O chief  and master  
of all the Messengers!  Peace be upon you O seal of all the Prophets  and 
Messengers!  Peace be upon you O the Messenger  of the Lord of the worlds!  
Peace  be upon  you O leader  of good!  Peace  be upon  you O conqueror  of piety!


Page 500:
498 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
Peace be upon you O Prophet  of mercy!  Peace  be upon you O guide of the 
nation!  Peace  be upon you O leader  of those of light! Peace  be upon you and 
upon the family of your house, from whom Allah Almighty  removed  
abomination  and whom  He purified  so much!  Peace  be upon  you and upon  your  
good holy companions,  and pure wives,  the mothers  of the faithful  believers:  
Might  Allah  reward  you with the best reward  as He rewarded  a Prophet  for his 
nation,  and a Messenger  for his people,  and might  He bless you every  time you 
are mentioned  by those  who celebrate  you, and every  time you are forgotten  by 
the heedless;  and He might  bless you in the foremost  and the last, with the best,  
most perfect,  most supreme,  most  glorious  , purest  and most  pleasant  bless He 
has ever granted  to anyone  of His creatures,  as He Almighty  has saved us, 
through  you, from error,  and opened  our eyes through  you after blindness,  and 
guided  us, through  you, from  ignorance:  I bear testimony  to the fact that there  is 
no god (to be worshipped)  but You, the One and Only,  other  than Whom  there  
is no god; and I bear testimony  to the fact that you are His servant  and 
Messenger,  His trustworthy,  select  and well choice  from  amongst  His creatures.  I 
bear  witness  to the fact that you conveyed  the Message,  fulfilled  the trust,  advised  
the nation  with sincerity,  strove  your enemy,  guided  your nation  (to the truth),  
worshipped  your Lord until death came to you: Allah's  blessing,  peace,  honour  
and glory  be upon  you as well as upon  the good  people  of your  house."
If he is recommended  to convey  the salutation  (to the Prophet)  of anyone  on 
his behalf,  let him say: "Peace  be upon  you from so and so; peace  be upon  you 
from so and so." Then,  let him move backward  as long as a cubit, and pay 
salutation  to Abu Bakr As-Siddiq  "Allah  be pleased  with him" for his head is 
alongside  the shoulder  of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon him", as well as the head of Umar "Allah be pleased  with him" lies 
alongside  the shoulder  of Abu Bakr.  Then,  let him move  backward  as long as a 
cubit and pay salutation  to Umar  Al-Faruq  "Allah  be pleased  with him",  saying:  
"Peace  be upon you both, O two ministers  of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace be upon him", who assisted  him undertake  the matter  of 
religion  as long as he was living,  and who took on yourselves  the affairs  of the 
religion  among  his nation  after his death,  in which  you followed  his steps, and 
worked  in accordance  with his conduct:  might  Allah reward  you with the best  
reward  a Prophet's  ministers  have  ever been  rewarded  for his religion."
Then,  let him return  and stand by the side of the head of the Messenger  of 
Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him",  between  the grave  and the pillar  
nowadays,  and face the Qiblah,  in order  to praise  and exalt  AJlah  Almighty,  and 
invoke  so much  Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon him",  and then say: "O Allah!  You say, and verily,  
your saying  is the truth: " If they had only,  when  they were unjust  to themselves,  
come
forgiveness  for them,  they would  have found  Allah  indeed  Oft-Returning,  Most  
Merciful."  (An-Nisa  64)unto you and asked Allah's  forgiveness,  and the Messenger  had asked


Page 501:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage  --------------------------------
yixzZs Ij <0jTijIJljlb  il ^
4 (fi^) QjJ -OJ l l_J wlc»-jJ
O Allah! We have hearkened  Your Statement  and complied  with Your  
Command,  and aimed  at Your  Prophet,  seeking  his intercession  for us to You in 
all of our sins, and how heavy  our backs  are with the burdens  of our sins, turning  
in repentance  to You from our errors and confessing  of our mistakes  and 
negligence:  so, please, O Allah, turn to us in repentance,  and accept the 
intercession  of our Prophet  for us, and upgrade  us, by the right  of his position  in 
Your  Sight.  O Allah!  Forgive  for the Emigrants  and the Helpers;  and forgive  for 
us and for our brothers  who had preceded  us to faith. O Allah!  Make  it not the 
last of our visits to the grave of Your Prophet,  and the Sanctuary  of You: O 
Allah,  Most  Merciful  of those  who show  mercy."
Then,  let him go to the meadow  and offer  a two-rak'ah  prayer,  and invoke  as 
much as he could, depending  upon the statement  of the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" (according  to what is unanimously  
narrated  on the authority  of both Abu Hurairah  and Abdullah  Ibn Zaid):  "There  
is, in between  my grave  and pulpit,  one of the meadows  of the Garden;  and my 
pulpit  lies on my Fount-lake."  Let him invoke  at the pulpit;  and it is desirable  to 
place  his hand on the lower  knot (of the pulpit)  on which  the Messenger  of Allaf  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" used to put his hand during  his 
sermons.
It is desirable  for him to go to (the mountain  of) Uhud  on Thursday,  and visit  
the graves  of the martyrs.  Let him then offer  the Morning  prayer  (on that day) in 
the mosque  of the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him"  
and come  out in order  to return  to offer the Zhuhr  prayer  in the same mosque;  
and in this way, no congregational  obligatory  prayer in the mosque  of the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" would  escape  him.  
Therefore,  it is desirable  for him to come out everyday  to Baqi', after paying  
salutation  to the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" in 
order  to visit the grave  of Uthman  "Allah  be pleased  with him" and the grave  of 
Al-Hassan  Ibn Ali "Allah  be pleased  with both".  In it there lie the graves  of Ali 
Ibn Al-Hussain,  Muhammad  Ibn Ali, Ja'far Ibn Muhammad  "Allah  be pleased  
with them".  Let him also offer prayer  in the mosque  of Fatimah  "Allah be 
pleased  with her" and visit the grave  of Ibrahim,  son of the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him",  and the grave  of Safiyyah,  the paternal  
aunt of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him".  All of 
those  lie in Baqi'.
It is desirable  for him to go to the mosque  of Quba'  every  Saturday,  and offer  
prayer  in it, depending  upon  the narration  (of both  An-Nasa'i  and Ibn Majah  on 
the authority  of Sahl Ibn Hunaif)  in which the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "He, who comes  out of his house  (and  
walks)  until he reaches  the mosque  of Quba  and offer  prayer  in it will receive  (a499


Page 502:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
reward)  equal  to that of Umrah."  Let him come  to the well of Aris which  lies 
near the mosque  and perform  ablution  and drink  from its water,  for it is said 
that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" spat in 
it. Let him further  go to the mosque  of the Conquest,  which lies on the 
Trench,  in addition  to all the mosques  and sites in Medina.  It is said that all 
mosques  and sites of Medina  are thirty,  and they are known  to its inhabitants.  
So, let him visit as much  of them  as he could.  Let him also visit the wells from  
which  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" used  
to perform  ablution,  take bath and drink. Those  are seven wells, (and one 
should  visit them and offer  ablution  and drink from their  water)  seeking  cure,  
and the bless of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him".500
If he could  stay in Medina,  with the observation  of its sancdty,  let him do, for 
it has a great excellence,  according  to the statement  of the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" (according  to the narration  on the 
authority  of Abu Hurairah,  Ibn Umar and Abu Sa'id): "None endure its 
(Medina's)  hardship  and severity  but that I would  be an intercessor  for him on 
the Day of Judgement."  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon  him" said (according  to the narration  of Ibn Majah  and At-Tirmidhi  on the 
authority  of Ibn Umar):  "If anyone  could,  let him die in Medina,  for none dies 
therein  but that I will be an intercessor  for him on the Day of Judgement."
Then,  if he finishes  from his jobs, and intends  to come out of Medina,  it is 
desirable  for him to go to the honoured  grave (of the Prophet)  and repeat  the 
supplication  of the visit as previously  (mentioned  earlier)  and then bid farewell  to 
the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" and ask Allah  
Almighty  to grant  him the gift of returning  to it once again,  and invoke  Allah for 
safety  in his journey,  and offer  a two-rak'ah  prayer  in the lesser  meadow,  in which  
the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" used to stand  
before  the closet  was added  to the mosque.  When  he comes  out, let him come  
out with his left foot followed  by the right and say: "O Allah!  send Your  Prayer  
and Blessing  upon  Muhammad  and upon the family  of Muhammad,  and make  it 
not the last visit to Your Prophet;  and remove  the burdens  of my sins with  
(helping  me) visit him, and let peace  and safety  accompany  me in my journey,  and 
make easy my return  to my family  and homeland:  O (Allah)  Most Merciful  of 
those  who show  mercy."  Then,  let him give in charity  to the neighbours  of the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him", as much as he 
could,  and visit the mosques  which  lie on the way between  Medina  and Mecca,  
one by one, and offer  prayer  in them;  and they are twenty  mosques.
A Chapter  On The Traditions  Of Returning  From  Journey
Whenever  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him",  
(according  to what is unanimously  narrated  on the authority  of Ibn Umar)  
returned  from a holy battle,  Hajj or Umrah,  he would  glorify  Allah thrice  at the 
ascent  of every promontory  and say: "There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but


Page 503:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage  
Allah, the One and Only, other than Whom  there is no partner:  His is the 
dominion,  and to Him be the praise  and He has power  over all things.  We are 
returning,  repenting,  worshipping,  prostrating  and giving  thanks  to our Lord.  
Allah has proved  true to His Promise,  and helped His servant,  and Alone  
defeated  the confederates.  One then should  use this tradition  in his return.
If he approaches  his city, let him move  his riding  mount,  and say: "O Allah!  
endow  us a good residence  and sustenance  in it." then, let him send to his 
family  such as tells them of his arrival,  in order that he should  not 
them suddenly.  This is the tradition  (which  should  be followed).  One should  
not also knock  the door of his family  at night.  When  he enters  the town,  let 
him first go directly  to the mosque  and offer  a two-rak'ah  prayer,  according  to 
the followed  tradition.  As such did the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  
and peace be upon him". When he enters his house,  let him say: "(Let's)  
repent  (let's) repent  to our Lord,  and return  in such a way as to leave nothing  
(of our sins) without  being forgiven."  If he resides  at his home,  let not him 
forget such blessing  as Allah has bestowed  upon him, of the visit of His 
House  and Sanctuary,  and the grave of His Messenger  "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace be upon him", and let not him be ungrateful  to this blessing,  by his 
returning  to heedlessness,  amusement,  and indulgence  in the sins, for this is 
not the sign of the Hajj which  is accepted  (by Allah Almighty).  Its sign is that 
one should  come to be abstinent  from this world,  desirous  for the hereafter,  
and well-prepared  for the meeting  of the Lord of the House  after meeting  the 
House  itself.501
come to
CHAPTER  THREE:
ON THE DETAILS  OF PROPRIETIES  AND INWARD  WORKS
The Exposition  Of The Details  Of Proprieties
Those  are ten, and they go as follows:
The first is that the expenses  should  be lawful,  and one is free from such of 
trades  as occupies  the heart and disband  his concern,  in order  that his attention  
would  be wholeheartedly  devoted  to Allah Almighty,  and the heart assured  and 
diverted  to the celebration  of (the Praises  of) Allah Almighty,  and sanctification  
of His ceremonies.  It is transmitted  through  the Family  of the House  (according  
to the narration  of Al-Khatib  on the authority  of Anas):  "Towards  the end of the 
time, the people  will set out for Hajj in four kinds (having  four purposes):  their  
magistrates  for excursion,  their wealthy  for practicing  traffic, their poor for 
begging,  and their  reciters  (of Qur'an)  for obtaining  good fame,  i.e. to be heard  of 
men."
The narration  refers to the different  worldly  purposes  which  are imagined  to 
be connected  with Hajj. All of that stands  against  the excellence  of Hajj, and keep  
it away from being the Hajj of the virtuous  (people),  particularly  if one is 
performing  Hajj solely  on behalf  of another  for a charge,  and by so doing  see' 
after  the world  through  the deed of the hereafter.  However,  the pious  devout  an 
those  of sound  hearts  among  the people  dislike  that unless  his intention  is to sta)


Page 504:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
in Mecca,  and he has not what might  help him reach  there. In this case, there is 
no harm  to take charge  just for this intention,  and not with the intendon  to attain  
this world  through  religion  but to attain  religion  through  this world.  At this point,  
his purpose  should  be to visit the Sacred  House  of Allah  Almighty,  and exempt  
his Muslim  brother  (on whose  behalf  he performs  Hajj) from the obligation.  To 
such person  does correspond  the statement  of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him" (according  to the narration  of Al-Baihaqi  on the 
authority  of Jabir):  "With  one Hajj three persons  might  enter the Garden:  the 
maker of its bequeath,  its implemented  and its performer  on behalf  of his 
brother."
I do not like to make  lawful  or unlawful  to take the charge  (for performing  
Hajj on behalf  of one's  brother)  after having  discharged  himself  of the obligation  
enjoined  upon  him by Islam.  But it is more  fitting  that he should  not do that, nor 
take it as his earnings  and trade, for Allah Almighty  gives the world through  
religion,  and He never  gives the religion  through  the world.  According  to the 
narration  (of Ibn Abd on the authority  of Mu'adh):  "The example  of such as 
fights  in Allah's  Cause  and takes  charge  for that is like the example  of the mother  
of Moses  "Peace  be upon  him" who suckled  her babe and at the same time took  
charge  for that."
So, whoever  has his parable  in taking  charge  for Hajj like the parable  of the 
mother  of Moses,  there is no blame  upon  him to take it, for indeed  he takes it 
just in order  to be able to perform  Hajj and visit (the House  and the Prophet's  
mosque),  and he does not perform  Hajj for the purpose  of taking  charge:  on the 
contrary,  he takes charge  in order  to (be able to) perform  Hajj, just in the same  
way as the mother  of Moses  used to take charge  in order  to be able to suckle  her 
child,  through  obscuring  her real identity  from  them.
The second  is that he should  not assist the enemies  of Allah Almighty,  
through  handing  over the toll to them,  and those  are the keepers  off the Sacred  
Mosque,  such as the governors  of Mecca  and the desert  Arabs  who lie in wait of 
the people  on the way (to Mecca).  However,  handing  the taxes to them  is to help  
them  commit  injustice,  and facilitate  its causes  against  them.  In this way, it is like 
the aid with the soul. So, let one use his skills for salvation;  and in case he could  
not, then, one of the learned  men says, and there  is no harm  in what  he says: "It 
is much  better  to leave the supererogatory  performance  of Hajj and return  home  
than to aid the doers  of injustice,  for indeed  (taking  such tolls) is an innovation  
which  has been renovated;  and submitting  to it might  turn it into a constant  
practice,  which would put the Muslims  to humiliation  and disgrace  through  
paying  the tribute.  It makes  no sense  to say "This  toll is taken  me and I'm forced  
to do so", for had he remained  in his house,  or had he returned  back, nothing  
would  have been taken  from  him. On the contrary,  one might  cause  the effects  of 
luxury  appear  on him, with the result  that more  money  will be required  from  him;  
and had he been  in the dress  of the poor,  nothing  would  have  been  required  from  
him. In this way,  it is he who drives  himself  to this state of being  under  coercion.
The third is to have abundance  of provisions  and liberty  of spending  and502


Page 505:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage
giving  willingly  and gladly, with neither  parsimony  nor extravagancy,  but to 
adhere  to moderation.  I mean  by extravagancy  to be blessed  with the best and 
most delicious  kinds of food and drink,  as is the habit of the spendthrifts.  But 
there  is no extravagancy  in spending  and giving  so much,  since there is no good  
in extravagancy,  nor is there  extravagancy  in good,  as it is said. To be sure,  to give  
provision  (in charity)  on the way to Hajj is to spend in the Cause of Allah  
Almighty;  and a single  Dirham  is multiplied  by seven  hundred.  According  to Ibn 
Umar  "Allah  be pleased  with both":  "The abundance  of food one serves  on his 
journey  is out of his generosity."  He used to say: "The best of pilgrims  is such as 
is the truest  in his intendon,  the purest  in his spending,  and has the best degree  of 
certainty  (of faith) among  them."  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" said (according  to the narradon  of Ahmad  on the authority  
of Jabir):  "The Hajj which  is accepted  (by Allah  Almighty)  has no reward  other  
than the Garden."  It was said: "What  does make Hajj acceptable  (by Allah  
Almighty)?"  He said: "It is to speak  with good  words,  and give food (to the poor  
and indigent)."
The fourth  is to leave obscenity,  wickedness  and wrangling  as expressed  in 
the Qur'an.  The obscenity  is a comprehensive  word  which  implies  every  kind of 
false, foul and lewd speech;  and it includes  talking  in an amatory  and provocative  
manner  with women  and flirting  with them,  and also the vain discourse  abou*  
sexual  intercourse  and its preliminary  entries.  This,  however,  provokes  the desirt  
for sexual  intercourse,  which  is forbidden  (during  Hajj),  and of a surety,  such as 
provokes  what is forbidden  is, in itself, forbidden.  As to wickedness,  it is a 
comprehensive  name  whose  application  includes  every  kind of disobedience  and 
defiance  of Allah  Almighty.  As to wrangling,  it is to go beyond  the due limits  of 
quarrelling  and arguing  (with  others),  which  might  develop  hatred  and resentment  
among  the people,  disband  the attention  and contradict  the good  manners.
According  to Sufyan:  "He, who speaks  with obscenity,  his Hajj has been  
corrupted."  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him"  
made both good speech  and serving  food (to the needy and indigent)  out of 
righteousness  of Hajj which  causes  it to be acceptable  (by Allah  Almighty).  Verily,  
arguing  and quarrelling  contradict  the good speech.  For this reason,  one should  
not be so much inclined  to object  to his friend,  his camel  driver,  or his other  
companions:  on the contrary,  he should  be lenient  and inclined  to lower  his wing  
to those who walk to the House  of Allah Almighty,  in adherence  to the good  
conduct.  It is not out of good  conduct  to avert  harm,  but it is to endure  it. in this 
issue,  it is said that the journey  has been  given  such a name  (of Safar)  because  it 
uncovers  (Yusfir)  the real manners  and characters  of men.
For this reason,  Umar "Allah be pleased  with him" asked a man who  
pretended  he had best recognition  of somebody:  "Have  you accompanied  him on 
journey"  from which  the good manners  might  be attested?  He answered  in the 
negative,  thereupon  he said: "Then,  I do not think  you recognize  him well."
The fifth is that he should  perform  Hajj on foot if it is within  the reach  of his 
capacity,  for this is better.  At his death,  Abdullah  Ibn Abbas  "Allah  be pleased503


Page 506:
504 The quarter  of the acts of worship
with both"  advised  his sons saying:  "O my sons! Perform  Hajj on foot, for the 
walking  pilgrim  receives  as much  as seven  hundred  good deeds  of those  of the 
Sanctuary  for every  steps  he takes."  It was said to him: "What  are the good  deeds  
of Sanctuary?"  he said: "The single good deed is multiplied  by one hundred  
thousand."  The desirability  of walking  on foot during  offering  the ceremonies,  
and from  Mecca  to the place  of standing  and to Mina  is better  confirmed  than to 
do it on the way to Hajj.
If one adds to his proceeding  to Hajj on foot his assuming  Ihram  from the 
area of his town,  it is out of the perfection  of Hajj according  to Umar,  Ali and 
Ibn Mas'ud  "Allah  be pleased  with them"  in their comment  on the statement  of 
Allah  Almighty:  " And complete  the Hajj or Umrah  in the service  of Allah."  (Al- 
Baqarah  196)
But according  to another  learned  men, riding  is much better  for it includes  
more spending  and provisions,  and it is farther  from boredom  and tedium,  and 
less harmful,  and nearer  to safety  and perfection  of Hajj. In consideration,  this 
might  not contradict  the former  opinion:  it should  be said decisively:  "He, who  
finds  it easy for him to walk,  let him walk,  and in case he finds himself  vulnerable  
to weakness,  bad manners  and indulgence  in any deed,  then riding  is much  better  
for him, just in the same way as fasting  might be better for the traveler  and 
patient  as long  as it does not lead to weakness  and bad manners.
One of the learned  men was asked whether  it is better for one to perform  
Umrah  on foot or to hire a donkey  for a Dirham,  thereupon  he said: "If the 
weight  of the Dirham  is heavy  on him, then, it is better  for him to hire a riding  
mount  than to walk;  and if walking  is hard on him, like the rich men, walking  is 
better  for him."  He seems  to have adopted  here the way of self-mortification,  and 
it might be acceptable.  But it is better  for him to walk, and rather  spend that 
Dirham  on what  is good,  for it is more fitting  for him than to spend  it on hiring  
in recompense  of troubling  the riding  mount.  But if he has no power  to combine  
both self-trouble  and the lack of wealth,  then, what has been mentioned  is not 
unlikely.
The sixth  is that he should  not ride but a sack, and avoid  the litter,  unless  he 
feels afraid  he would  not sit firm on the sack for a legal excuse.  There  are two 
reasons  for that: the first is to relieve  the riding  camel  of the heavy  weight  by 
which  the litter is harmed,  the second  is to avoid the aspect  of the luxurious  
arrogant  people  in Hajj. the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon him" performed  Hajj on a riding  mount,  and underneath  him there was a 
shabby  saddle,  and a scruffy  piece of amaranth  as cheap  as no more than four  
Dirhams  (according  to the narration  of both At-Tirmidhi  and Ibn Majah  on the 
authority  of Anas). Furthermore,  he performed  circumambulation  (round  the 
House)  while being  on his riding  mount,  in order  that the people  might  see his 
guidance  and characteristics,  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon him" said (according  to the narration  of Muslim  and An-Nasai  on the 
authority  of  Jabir):  "Take  (and learn)  from  me your  ceremonies."


Page 507:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage
It is said that those  litters  were  renovated  by Al-Hajjaj,  and the learned  men of 
his time rejected  them.  It is narrated  on the authority  of Sufyan  Ath-Thawri  from  
his father  that he said: I set out from Kufah  to Qadisiyyah  on my way to perform  
Hajj, and I met the caravans  which  came from different  countries,  and behold!  I 
saw all the pilgrims  on sacks,  baskets  and saddles,  and I did not see among  all of 
them  but two litters.*'  Whenever  Ibn Umar  looked  at such of dresses  and litters  as 
were  renovated  by Al-Hajjaj,  he would  say: "No doubt,  the real pilgrims  are but a 
few, even though  the riders  are so much  in number."  Then,  he looked  at a poor  
man, of a shabby  appearance  underneath  whom  there were baskets  and said:  
"This  is one of the true pilgrims."
The seventh  is that he should  be of a shabby  appearance,  disheveled,  covered  
with dust, not given  so much  to adornment,  nor inclined  to the means  and ways  
of ostentation,  lest he might be enrolled  among  the group of the arrogant  
luxurious,  and thus excluded  from the party  of the weak  indigent  righteous  select.  
Indeed,  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" ordered  
that (the pilgrims)  should be disheveled  and barefooted  (according  to the 
narration  of Al-Baghawi  and At-Tabarani  on the authority  of Abdullah  Ibn Abu  
Hadrad),  and rather forbade  opulence  and luxury (in life according  to the 
narration  of Ahmad  on the authority  of Fadalah  Ibn Ubaid).  According  to the 
narration  (of both At-Tirmidhi  and Ibn Majah  on the authority  of Ibn Umar):  
"Verily,  the (real) pilgrim  is the disheveled  one who is covered  with dust."
Allah  Almighty  said (according  to the narration  of Al-Hakim  on the authority  
of Abu Hurairah  and Ahmad  on the authority  of Ibn Umar):  "Look  (O angels)  at 
the visitors  of My House!  They  have come  as disheveled,  covered  with dust, from  
deep and distant  mountain  highways."  Allah  Almighty  says: "Then  let them fulfill  
the rites prescribed  for them,  perform  their  vows,  and (again)  circumambulate  the 
Ancient  House."  (Al-Hajj  29)505
i jij- rtSgJ ^ }
The rites pointed  out here refer to the state of being  disheveled  and covered  
with dust, and to fulfill  that is to get one's  head shaved,  one's mustache  cut short,  
and trim one's nails. Umar  Ibn Al-Khattab  wrote to the chiefs of soldiers  that 
they should  put on the shabby  clothes  and lead a rough  coarse  life.
It is said that those  of Yemen  are the adornment  of all the pilgrims,  for they  
appear  in the state of humbleness  and weakness,  in imitadon  of the conduct  of 
the early men. Thus,  the pilgrim  should  avoid  the red in his clothes  in particular,  
and fame (among  the people)  whatever  it might  be in general.  It is narrated  (by 
Abu Dawud  on the authority  of Rafi' Ibn Khadij)  that once, "Then  let them  
complete  the rites prescribed  for them, perform  their vows, and (again)  
circumambulate  the Ancient  House."  Was on journey  when he and his 
companions  halted  at a certain  place for rest. The camels  were let loose  to graze,  
and behold!  He saw red coverings  on their back-saddles!  On that he said: "I 
that redness  is prevalent  among  you." "On that" (the narrator  said) "We rushed  
to them and snatched  them from the backs of the camels,  so that some of thesee


Page 508:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 506 --------------------
camels  were startled."
The eighth  is that he should  be lenient  to the riding  mount  in such a way as 
not to overload  it with what is beyond  its capacity,  and the litter is beyond  its 
capacity;  and sleeping  on it causes  harm  to it, and overburdens  it. it was the habit  
of the people  of piety not to sleep on their riding  mounts,  unless  it was a nap 
while  sitting;  and they used not to stand  on them  a long standing.  In this respect  
the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said (according  
to the narration  of Ahmad  on the authority  of Sahl Ibn Mu'adh):  "Take  not the 
backs of your riding  mounts  as chairs (to stand upon)."  It is desirable  that one 
should  dismount  of his riding beast every morning  and evening,  in order to 
relieve  it for it is out of the tradition  (according  to the narration  of At-Tabarani  
on the authority  of Anas).
There  are narrations  in support  of that handed  down  from  the early  men. One  
of the early  men used to hire a riding  mount  on the condition  that he would  not 
dismount  of it, and give the charge  in full, and in spite of that, he would  
dismount  of it in order  to be kind to the beast,  and thus such kindness  would  be 
recorded  in his account  of good  deeds,  and not in the account  of the hirer.  Such  
as harms  a beast,  and overload  it with what  is beyond  its capacity  will be required  
to compensate  it on the Day of Judgement.  It is narrated  that Abu Ad-Darda'  
said to a camel  belonging  to him at death:  "O camel!  Do not make  a complaint  
against  me to your Lord, for indeed,  I have never  overloaded  you with what is 
beyond  your  capacity."
In total, one receives  a reward  in (his kindness  to) every  living  animal.  So, let 
the pilgrim  observe  the rights of the beast, as well as the rights of the hirer.  
However,  to dismount  of it even for an hour everyday  would  relieve  the riding  
mount,  and cheer  up the hirer. A man said to Ibn Al-Mubarak:  "Carry  this letter  
from me in order to convey  it (to somebody)."  He said: "No until I take the 
permission  of the camel-driver  from whom  I've hired this camel."  Behold  how  
careful  he was of carrying  a letter  which  is almost  of no weight.  Verily,  this is the 
way of resolute  carefulness.  That's  because  if the door  is opened  to what  is small  
and insignificant,  it might be opened  wider little by little to what is much  
significant.
The ninth  is that he should  draw near (unto Allah  Almighty)  through  an 
offering  of a blood-sacrifice,  even though  it is not obligatory  upon him. Let 
him endeavour  to make such offering  from the fat expensive  among  the life-  
stock,  from which  he should  eat in case it is voluntary,  but he should  not do 
in case it is obligatory.  In comment  on the statement  of Allah Almighty:  " 
Such (is his state):  and whoever  holds  in honour  the Symbols  of Allah,  (in the 
sacrifice  of animals),  such (honour)  should  come truly from piety of heart"  
(Al-Hajj  32)
i @  v^  erf ^ 0*5 ^
It is said: this is to make  it (the sacrifice)  fair and fat.
It is better  for him to drive the sacrificial  animals  from the place fixed for 
assuming  Ihram  if it does not trouble  nor harm him; and let him refrain  from


Page 509:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage
haggling  in transaction,  for they used to exceed  the due limits of the price of 
three things,  and dislike  haggling  in three things: the sacrificial  animal,  the 
offering,  and the slave. To be sure, the best of that is the most expensive  and 
the dearest  to the sight of its owners.  It is narrated  (by Abu Dawud)  on the 
authority  of Ibn Umar  that Umar  offered  (as sacrifice)  a camel  of Bukht  (the 
highest  class of camels),  and then three  hundred  Dinars  were offered  to him for 
it. He went  to the Messenger  of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him” 
and said to him:” O Messenger  of Allah! I’ve offered  as sacrifice  a camel  of 
Bukht  and then three hundred  Dinars  were offered  to me for it: should  I sell it 
and purchase  camels  (and offer them as sacrifice)  by its price?”  he said: “No, 
but slaughter  it righdy. ”
That ’s because  the few which  is of good quality  is much  better  than the much  
which  is of inferior  quality.  Three  hundred  Dinars  could  buy ten normal  camels,  
which  might  make  much  of flesh. But the real purpose  is not to make much  of 
flesh but to purify  the soul, and cleanse  it from the attribute  of parsimony  and 
rather  adorn  it with the beauty  of exaltation  of Allah Almighty:  " It is not their  
meat nor their blood,  that reaches  Allah:  it is your piety that reaches  Him."  (Al- 
Hajj 37)507
This could  only be achieved  through  observing  the precious  value,  no mattea  
few or great  in number  it might  be.
The Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him” was asked  
about  the righteousness  of Hajj which  makes  it acceptable  (in the Sight  of Allah),  
thereupon  he said (according  to the narration  of At-Tirmidhi,  Ibn Majah  and Al- 
Bazzar  on the authority  of Abu Bakr): "It is to raise one's voice  with Talbiyah,  
and slaughter  camels  (as sacrifice)."
It is further  narrated  (by Ibn Majah and At-Tirmidhi)  on the authority  of 
A'ishah  that the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him” 
said: "There  is no deed mankind  does on the Day of Sacrifice  much  dearer  in the 
Sight  of Allah  Almighty  than his offering  a blood-sacrifice;  and this (sacrifice)  will 
come  on the Day of Judgement  with its horns  and hoofs,  and before  the blood  
fall down on the ground,  (the reward  of) it is kept in the Presence  of Allah  
Almighty. ” So (A’ishah resumed)  be cheerful  on account  of it! according  to a 
certain  narration  (by Ibn Majah  on the authority  of Zaid Ibn Arqam):  "You  will 
have a good deed for every hair of its skin, a good deed for every drop of its 
blood,  and it will be placed  in the balance  (of deeds):  so, receive  the glad tidings!"  
the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him” further  said:  
"Make  good and valuable  your (sacrificial)  gifts for they will be your mounts  and 
vehicles  on the Day of  Judgement."
The tenth  is that he should  be well-pleased  with such of expenses  as he has 
spent and such of sacrificial  animals  as he has offered,  and accept (with  
satisfaction)  such of loss or calamity  in property  or camels  as has affected  him, in 
case there  is any; for indeed,  this is one of the signs of the acceptance  of his Hajj.


Page 510:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
Verily,  the calamity  on the way to Hajj is equal  (in reward)  to the spending  in the 
Cause  of Allah,  in a rate of seven  hundred  Dirhams  for each Dirham,  and this is 
like the difficulties  and hardships  one receives  on the way of Jihad.  Thus,  he will 
have a reward  for every kind of harm or loss he receives.  So, let him waste  
nothing  of it with Allah  Almighty.
It is also said that one of the signs  of the acceptance  of Hajj is to leave  such of 
sins as he used to do (before  it), and substitute  good  righteous  companions  and 
brothers  (in the religion  of Allah)  for those  idle and wicked,  and the gatherings  of 
celebration  and attentiveness  for those  of amusement  and heedlcssness.
The Exposition  Of The Internal  Works,
And The Point  Of Making  Sincere  The Intention,  And The Way Of 
Considering  The Honoured  Shrines,  And The Way Of Reflecting  
Them,  And Celebrating  Their  Mysteries  And Significances,  From  The
Beginning  To The End Of Hajj
It should  be known  to you that the first thing to be learnt of Hajj is to 
understand,  i.e. to understand  the position  of Hajj in the religion,  then, to have  
longing  for it, then to decide  to perform  it, then to sever the connections  that 
prevent  it, then to buy the garment  of Ihram,  then to buy the provisions,  then to 
hire the riding  mount,  then to set out, then to proceed  in the desert,  then to put 
on Ihram with Talbiyah  (responding  to Allah's  Call) in the place fixed for 
assuming  Ihram, then to enter Mecca,  and then to complete  the rites as 
previously  (described  in detail).  In each of those,  there is a reminder  for such as 
remembers,  an example  to be learnt  for him who takes lessons,  a stimulation  to 
the true follower  of the path and a definition  and a reference  to him who is 
prudent.  Let's here indicate  to their keys, until  when  their doors  are opened,  and 
you come to know their causes,  each pilgrim  will be exposed  to such of their  
mysteries  as is required  by the purity  of his heart,  the cleanness  of his inward,  and 
the readiness  of his understanding.
As for understanding,  it should  be known  to you that there is no way to 
Allah Almighty  barring  that of refraining  from desires  and abstaining  from  
pleasures  and delights,  and rather  restricting  oneself  to such of them as is 
necessary,  and to devote  himself  wholeheartedly  to Allah Almighty  in all of 
his states of motion  and stillness.  Let me elucidate  that: the monks  of the 
previous  religions  isolated  themselves  from all the people,  and turned  to live 
in the mountain-tops,  giving  preference  to loneliness  from  all the creatures,  in 
order  to seek the company  with Allah  Almighty.  In this way, they left, for the 
Sake of Allah  Almighty,  the pleasures  and delights  which  were at convenience,  
and adhered  to the difficult  mortifications  in the hope of the hereafter.  Allah  
Almighty  appreciated  them  in His statement:  "because  amongst  these  are men  
devoted  to learning  and men who have renounced  the world,  and they are not 
arrogant."  (Al-Ma'idah  82)
4 ?!Jj) ^ Jkgjlj  bLijj  OL? ^508


Page 511:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage
But when  all of that vanished,  and the people  turned  to follow  their own  
lusts, and refrained  from devodon  to the service  of Allah Almighty,  and 
weakened  to endure  it, Allah  Almighty  sent the Prophet  Muhammad  "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon him" in order  to revive  the way to the hereafter,  
and renew  the right way of the sunnah  of all the Messengers  and Prophets  
before  him, by following  it. (According  to the narradon  of Abu Dawud  on the 
authority  of Abu Umamah)  when the people  of the previous  religions  asked  
him about  monasticism  and wandering  (through  the land for the sake of the 
religion),  he said: "Allah  Almighty  has given us instead  of it Jihad (in His 
Cause)  and (asked  us to utter)  Takhir  at every  promontory  (of land)."
The Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him” was 
further  asked about the wanderers  (through  the land for the sake of the 
religion),  thereupon  he said (according  to the narradon  of Al-Baihaqi  on the 
authority  of Abu Hurairah):  "The fasdng  persons  are (equal  to) the wanderers  
(through  the land for the Sake of Allah  Almighty)."  Allah Almighty  bestowed  
His blessing  upon  this (Muslim)  nadon  when  He made  the performance  of Hajj 
their own monasdcism.  He Almighty  honoured  the Ancient  House,  by ascribing  
it to Himself,  and set it up as an aimed  target  for His servants,  and made the 
area surrounding  it a Sanctuary  of His House,  in exaltadon  of its matter,  and 
made  Arafah  like a water-chute  at the courtyard  of His Fount-lake,  and affirmed  
the sanctity  of its games  and trees, and placed  it on the example  of the casde. ‘ 
of kings, to which the visitors  come from every deep distant  direcdon,  a 
disheveled,  covered  with dust, humble  and submitdng  to the Lord of the 
House,  in obedience  to His Glory,  and submission  to His Power  and Honour,  
with confession  of his being  deemed  far beyond  any limitadon  of a house  or 
any inclusion  of a town, in order that this would more indicadve  of their  
bondage  and slavery  and more perfect  of demonstrating  their submission  and 
obedience.
Accordingly,  He assigned  to them, in (the House)  some acts to which the 
souls might  not be familiar,  and to whose  significance  the minds  might  not be 
guided,  such as throwing  the Jamrahs  with the pebbles,  and compassing  Safa and 
Marwah  round  repeatedly;  and by the like of those  acts, the perfect  bondage  and 
slavery  (of people  to Allah Almighty)  seem more evident.  The cause of the 
obligatory  charity,  for example,  is to show  lenience  and kindness  towards  others,  
and its significance  in this respect  is understood,  and the mind is inclined  to it; 
and so is the fasdng,  which  is to overcome  the desire  that is the instrument  of the 
enemy  of Allah Almighty  and devote  oneself  wholeheartedly  to the religious  
service  through  refraining  from the other occupations  (which  might  divert  one 
from  Allah).  Both  bowing  and prostration  in prayer  are to show  one's  humility  to 
Allah  Almighty,  through  acts which  themselves  are forms  of humbleness;  and the 
souls  are familiar  to exalt  Allah  Almighty.
But the running  between  Safa and Marwah  repeatedly,  and throwing  the 
Jamrah,  and the like of them,  the souls have no benefit  from them,  nor are they  
familiar  to them, nor are the minds  guided  to their significance.  Thus,  nothing509


Page 512:
510 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
motivates  one to do them  other  than the absolute  command  (of Allah  Almighty),  
whose  purpose  is to comply  with the command  in so far it is only a command,  
whose  implementing  is obligatory.  This keeps the mind away from its normal  
operations,  and turns both soul and disposition  from sociability.  To be sure, the 
disposition  becomes  inclined  directly  to such of things as the mind perceives  
whose  significance;  and this inclination  helps  the command,  and acts besides  it as 
a motif  to the act, therewith  the perfect  bondage  and submission  might  hardly  
appear.  For this reason,  The Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be 
upon  him” said in Hajj particularly:  "I'm responding  to Your  Call with a greater  
pilgrimage  in truth,  in devotion  and in bondage."  He did not say so in prayer,  nor 
in any religious  service  other  (than  Hajj).
If the wisdom  of Allah Almighty  decrees  that the salvation  of the people  
should  be joined with doing things which contradict  their dispositions  and 
desires,  having  their reins led by the law, in such a way that they do their deeds  in 
accordance  to the ways of submission  and obedience,  and pursuant  to the 
requirements  of bondage  and slavery, then, such of deeds as to whose  
significance  the minds  could  not be guided  will come  to be more  consummate  to 
purify  the souls,  and divert  them from the requirements  of the dispositions,  and 
the ethics  to the requirements  of bondage  and slavery.
Having  made  sense  to this, you could  then come  to understand  that the cause  
of being astonished  by those amazing  acts is the failure to understand  the 
mysteries  of those acts of worship.  However,  this amount  is enough  to explain  
the understanding  of the principle  of Hajj,  Allah  Willing.
As for longing,  it is incited  after  understanding,  and authentication  of the fact 
that this is the House  of Allah  Almighty,  which  He has placed  on the example  of 
the castles  of kings,  and that its visitor  is a visitor  of Allah Almighty,  and that 
such as intends  to visit the House  in the world  is worthy  of having  (the reward  
of) his visit wasted,  and thus the real purpose  of his visit will be achieved  for him 
in its appointed  time,  i.e. to have the honour  of seeing  the Countenance  of Allah,  
Most Bounteous  and Generous  in the everlasting  abode,  since this eye whose  
sight  is restricted,  and which  should  inevitably  perish  in the world  is not qualified  
for seeing  the Countenance  of Allah  Almighty,  nor is it able to endure  it, nor is it 
ready  to be adorned  with that (light  of vision),  in view of its limitation.  But if it, 
in the hereafter,  is provided  with the blessing  of eternal  endurance,  and rendered  
deem far beyond  the causes  of change  and annihilation,  it will be ready  to look  
and see (the Countenance  of Allah Almighty).  But, for the purpose  of (visiting)  
the House,  and because  of its looking  at it, it will deserve  (as its reward)  the 
meeting  of the Lord  of the House,  in accordance  with the generous  promise.
Verily,  longing  to meet Allah Almighty  prompts  it inevitably  to its causes,  
seeing  that the lover  always  has longing  to anything  that relates  to the object  of 
his love. As long as the House  is related  to Allah  Almighty,  it is more  likely  that 
should  have longing  to it just for this relation,  in addition  to seeking  its visit  
for attaining  the abundant  reward  promised  for that.
As for his resolution  (to visit the House  and perform  Hajj), let him knowone


Page 513:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage  
first that with his resolution  and decision,  he is going  to depart  from his family  
and homeland,  to forsake  his desires  and pleasures,  turning  to the visit of the 
House  of Allah  Almighty.  So, let him exalt  in himself  the high estimation  of the 
House,  and the high estimation  of the Lord of the House,  putting  in mind  that he 
has decided  to do a thing of great loftiness  and importance,  and that such as 
seeks what is great should  jeopardize  another  thing of similar  greatness  and 
importance.  Moreover,  let him make  his resolution  sincere  to the Countenance  of 
Allah  Almighty,  far from  the flaws  of showing  off for the purpose  of being  heard  
or seen of men.
Let him be certain  of the fact that nothing  from his deed and intention  would  
be accepted  unless  it is sincere  and true, putting  in consideration  that the most  
wicked  thing  is to aim at the visit of the House  and Sanctuary  of Allah  Almighty,  
while  his real purpose  and intention  are for another  thing.  So, let him correct  his 
resolution  within  himself,  and to correct  it is to prove  sincere  (to his intention),  
and to prove  sincere  is to refrain  from such of things  as through  which  he seeks  
to be seen and heard  of men. So, let him beware  of exchanging  what is inferior  
for what  is better.
As for severing  any connections  that might  hinder  him from performing  
Hajj, it is to restitute  all injustices,  and turn in sincere  and true repentance  tc 
Allah Almighty,  which is to give up all sins. However,  every injustice  has i 
connection  (with him), and every connection  as such is like a present  creditor  
clinging  to his neck,  calling  him: "Where  are you going?  Do you aim at (the visit  
of) the House  of the Kings of all kings, even though  you are indulging  in 
implementing  His Commands,  dealing  with Him slightly,  and neglectful  of Him  
in this residence  of you? Do you not feel shy of going  to him in the form of a 
disobedient  slave lest He might  reject  you with failure?  If you are desirous  for 
Him to accept  your visit, you should  first implement  His Commands,  restitute  
the injustices  and turn in repentance  to Him,  and give up all sins, and sever  your  
heart  from anything  that might  cause  you to turn back to what is behind  you, in 
order  to turn to Him with the face of your heart,  in the same  way as you turn to 
His House  with the face of your  outward.
If you do not do so, you will receive  nothing  from your journey  but the 
trouble  and tire on the one hand,  and the rejection  and failure  on the other  hand.  
Let him also sever his relation  with his homeland,  in the same way as one who  
severs  relation  with his homeland  assumes  he will not return  to it once again;  and 
let him write down his bequest  for his family  and offspring,  for indeed  the 
traveler  with his property  are in danger  barring  such as safeguarded  by Allah  
Almighty.  Let such as severs  the relations  for the journey  of Hajj the severance  of 
relations  with the journey  to the hereafter,  for this journey  is ahead of him in 
closeness,  and he does his journey  (to Hajj) in the hope that the other  will be 
much  easier,  for it is the final abode,  to which  his journey  will come  to an end.  
So, let not him be heedless  of that journey  (to the hereafter)  when  he gets ready  
for this journey  (to Hajj).
As for provisions,  he should  seek it from  a lawful  source,  and if he feels he is511


Page 514:
512 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
eager  to take much  of it, and to keep  what  will remain  with him along  his journey,  
which does not change  nor putrefy  before achieving  his purpose,  let him 
remember  that the journey  to the hereafter  is much  longer  than this journey  (to 
Hajj),  and that his real provision  should  be piety,  and such as he thinks  to be his 
provisions  should  remain  behind  him and betrays  him at his death,  and thus it 
will not be kept with him, just as the fresh food, which  putrefies  at the first 
station  of the journey,  with the result  that he will be, at the time of his need,  in 
confusion  and perplexity,  in the state of neediness,  with no way for salvation.  So, 
let him beware  lest his deeds  which  act as his provisions  to the hereafter  might  
not accompany  him after death,  for being  corrupted  by the flaws of showing  off 
and the impurities  of indulgence  and negligence.
As for the riding  mount,  if he brings  it, let him thank  Allah from the depth  
of his heart for He has made subject  to him the mounts,  in order  to carry (his 
things)  on his behalf,  and relieve  him of trouble  and difficulty.  Let him further  
remember  the vehicle  which  he will ride to the hereafter,  i.e. the bier on which  he 
is carried  (to the grave).  From  this point  of view,  the journey  to Hajj is similar  to 
the journey  to the hereafter.  Let him consider  whether  his journey  on that riding  
mount  would  be valid for his provisions  during  his journey  on the other  vehicle  
to the hereafter,  for indeed,  how close it is to him; and what makes  him know,  
perhaps  he is close to death so much  that he might  ride the bier (to the grave)  
before  he rides the camel  (to perform  Hajj).  Verily,  his riding  the bier is taken  for 
granted,  whereas  making  easy the means  of journey  (to Hajj) is questionable.  
Then, how should  one be cautious  of the means of the journey  which is 
questionable,  and be ostentatious  in his provisions  and mount,  and, at the same  
time,  be neglectful  of the matter  of the journey  (to the hereafter)  which  is certain?
As for buying  both garments  of Ihram,  let him remember  the shroud  in 
which  he will be shrouded:  he will be dressed  in it, whereas  he is going  to put 
on both garments  of Ihram  once he becomes  close to the House  of Allah  
Almighty.  (Let him remember  that) his journey  to it might  not be achieved,  and 
that he might  inevitably  meet  Allah  Almighty  as shrouded  in the shroud.  Just as 
he does not meet the House  of Allah  Almighty  unless  in contradiction  to his 
normal  costume  and appearance,  he will also not meet  Allah,  after death,  but in 
a dress,  which  is very different  from that of this world;  and of a surety,  this 
dress (of Ihram)  is similar  to that shroud  (of death),  for there  is nothing  sewn  in 
any of them.
As for setting  out of the country,  let him know  at that moment  that he is 
going  to depart  from his family  and homeland,  and rather  he is turning  to Allah  
Almighty  on a journey,  which  is not similar  to any of those  journeys  belonging  to 
this world.  So, let him bring  in his heart  the aim which  he wants  to achieve,  the 
destination  of his journey,  and the object  of his visit, putting  in mind that he is 
turning  to visit the King of all kings,  in the company  of the visitors,  who have  
been called,  and they responded,  who have been yearned,  and they yearned,  who  
have been made  to rush, and they rushed,  who have severed  all the connections  
(they have with others),  and left the people,  and turned  with their faces to the


Page 515:
513 Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage
House of Allah Almighty,  which has been exalted,  sanctified,  and highly  
esteemed,  having  the purpose  to console  themselves  with meeting  the House  
from  the meeting  of the Lord  of the House,  until they will be given  the utmost  of 
their hopes and expectations,  and blessed  with the vision of their Lord and 
Master.
Let him also bring  in his heart  the hope  of arrival  and acceptance,  not because  
of his works  of setting  out on journey  and leaving  his family  and property,  but 
because  of his confidence  of the Bounty  of Allah  Almighty,  and in expectation  of 
achieving  His Promise  for such as visit His House.  Let him have the hope  that if 
he could  not be able to arrive,  and rather  death  approaches  him on the way, he 
will meet  Allah  Almighty  as a delegate  to Him, depending  upon the statement  of 
Allah Almighty:  M He who forsakes  his home  in the cause of Allah,  finds in the 
earth  many  a refuge,  wide and spacious:  should  he die as a refugee  from  home  for 
Allah  and His Messenger,  his reward  becomes  due and sure with Allah:  and Allah  
is Oft-Forgiving,  Most  Merciful."  (An-Nisa  100)
$ jj Cr? J 5^ Jej'i I J 0 ?
4^ LIj yhS' 4jjl 0 U-fl.3 4$^jUJ *-4jy*uJJ
As for his coming  through  the desert,  until he reaches  the place fixed for 
assuming  Ihram,  and seeing those difficulties,  let (the pilgrim)  remember  ii 
connection  with it the period  from his coming  out of this world  by death  to the 
appointed  time on the Day of Judgement,  and such of terrors  and requirements  
as lie between  them.  Let the terror  of the highwaymen  remind  him of the terror  
of the question  of both Munkar  and Nakir  in the grave, and the wild animals  
which spread  on the way remind  him of the scorpions,  worms  serpents  and 
female-snakes  of die grave,  and his departure  and solitude  from his family  and 
relatives  remind  him of the loneliness,  distress  and seclusion  of the grave. Let 
him, in observing  those  fears in his deeds  and statements,  take provisions  against  
the terrors  of the grave.
As for putting  on Ihram  and reciting  Talbiyah  from the place fixed for 
assuming  Ihram,  let him know  that its significance  is to respond  to the Call of 
Allah  Almighty.  So, entertain  the hope of having  it accepted,  and beware  lest it 
would  be said to you: "Let your response  be not accepted  , nor you be blessed."  
For this reason,  be in the state of joining  both hope and fear, and set yourself  
free from your might and power,  and put your trust in Allah's Bounty  and 
Generosity.  Verily,  the time at which  you recite Talbiyah  is the beginning  of 
implementing  the command  (of Allah),  and it is the place  of risk.
In this respect,  Sufyan  Ibn Uyainah  said: Ali Ibn Al-Hussain  "Allah  be pleased  
with both" performed  Hajj. When he assumed  Ihram and his riding mount  
became  upright  with him, he turned  pale and trembled,  and grew  shocked  to the 
extent  that he could  not recite  the wording  of Talbiyah.  It was said to him: "Why  
are you not reciting  Talbiyah?"  he said: "I fear it might  be said to me: 'Let your  
response  be not accepted,  nor you be blessed'."  When he started reciting


Page 516:
514 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
Talbiyah,  he swooned  and fell down  of his riding  mount.  He kept on that state  
until he fulfilled  his Hajj.
Ahmad  Ibn Abu Al-Hawari  said: I was in the company  of Abu Sulaiman  Ad- 
Darani  when he intended  to put on Ihram.  He did not recite the wording  of 
Talbiyah  until we proceeded  as long as a mile, whereupon  he fell unconscious,  
after  which  he recovered  and said: "O Ahmad!  Allah  Almighty  revealed  to Moses  
"Peace  be upon  him" to 'tell the wrongdoers  among  the children  of Israel  not to 
celebrate  Me so much, for indeed,  I mendon  with curse such of them as 
celebrates  Me'. Woe to you O Ahmad!  I was reported  that such as performs  Hajj  
unlawfully,  and recites  the wording  of Talbiyah,  Allah  Almighty  says to him: 'Let 
your response  be not accepted,  nor you be blessed  until you restore  (such of 
unlawful  things)  as you have in your hand'.  We are not secure  that this would  be 
said to us."
Furthermore,  let (the pilgrim),  when  he raises his voice with Talbiyah  in the 
place fixed for assuming  Ihram,  remember  his response  to the Call of Allah  
Almighty  when He says: "And proclaim  the Pilgrimage  among  men; they will 
come  to you on foot and (mounted)  on every  kind of camel,  lean on account  of 
journeys  through  deep  and distant  mountain  highways"  (Al-Hajj  27)
0* <J^=  4 0^'j }
And the Call to the people  by sounding  the trumpet,  and raising  them from  
their graves in swarms  at the plain land of the Day of Judgement,  in their  
response  to the Call of Allah Almighty,  and division  into those who are the 
nearest  devotees,  those  who are hateful,  those  who are accepted,  and these  who  
are rejected,  and all of them will be wavering  at first between  fear and hope,  in 
the same  way as a pilgrim  wavers  at the place  fixed for assuming  Ihram,  where  he 
does not know  whether  it will be easy for them  to complete  Hajj, and whether  it 
will be accepted  (by Allah  Almighty).
As for entering  Mecca,  let him remember  that by so doing,  he has entered  
the Sanctuary  of Allah Almighty  safely  hoping  that through  such entering,  he 
might  be secure  from the Punishment  of Allah  Almighty.  Let him also fear that 
he might  not be fitting  for that nearness  (to Allah  Almighty),  and in this way, he 
would  be, because  of his entering  the Sanctuary  of Allah,  failing  and worthy  of 
the wrath (of Allah),  let him be hopeful  in all the times (of Allah's  Mercy  and 
Forgiveness),  since (Allah's)  generosity  is all-embracing,  and the Lord is Most  
Merciful,  the Honour  of the House  is great,  the visitor's  right  is observed,  and the 
security  of him who seeks  shelter  and refuge  is not neglected.
As for the sight's  falling  on the House,  let him bring in his heart the 
greatness  and magnificence  of the House,  and assume  that he is seeing  the Lord  
of the House,  because  of his great  exaltation  of it. Let you be hopeful  that Allah  
Almighty  would  grant  you the privilege  of seeing  His Honoured  Countenance,  in 
the same  way as He has granted  you the blessing  of looking  at His Great  House;  
and give thanks  to Allah  Almighty  for His helping  you fulfill  your desire,  and join 
the company  of those  who have come  as delegates  to Him.  At that moment,  you


Page 517:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage  
should  remember  how the people,  on the Day of Judgement,  would  surge forth  
in the direction  of the Garden,  in the hope  of entering  it, and how they would  be 
divided  into some  who would  be admitted,  and others  rejected,  in the same  way 
as the pilgrims  are divided  into those who are accepted,  and those who are 
rejected.  Do not be heedless  of remembering  the matters  and affairs of the 
hereafter  in everything  you see, for indeed,  the states  of Hajj indicate  to the states  
of the hereafter.
As for offering  circumambulation  round  the House,  you should  know  that 
it is (a kind of) prayer.  So, you should  bring  in your heart,  in connection  with it, 
such of exaltation,  fear, hope,  and love as we've  explained  in detail  in the Book  of 
Prayer.  Put in mind that in your circumambulation,  you resemble  the nearest  
angels  who surround  the Throne  (of Majesty)  and circumambulate  it. do not 
think that the real purpose  is to have your body circumambulate  round the 
House,  for the real objective  is to have your heart circumambulate  with the 
celebration  of the Lord of the House,  with Whom  you should start your  
celebration,  and with Whom  you should  end it, in the same way as you begin  
your  circumambulation  with the House,  and end it also with the House.
You should  also put in mind that the noble  circumambulation  is that of the 
heart in the Presence  of the Lord,  and that the House  is an evident  example  in 
the worldly  kingdom  of this Presence  of the Lord, which  is invisible,  i.e. the 
world  of dominion,  in the same way as the body is an evident  example  in the 
visible  world  of the heart  which  is invisible,  and it lies in the world  of the unseen,  
and that it is through  the worldly  kingdom  of what is visible  that the world  of 
dominion  which  is invisible  could  be perceived  by him, to whom  Allah  Almighty  
opens  the door  (to the unseen).
To this parallelism  it is referred  with the fact that the Populated  House  (in the 
heaven)  parallels  the Ka'bah  (on earth.  The circumambulation  which  the angels  
perform  round it is equal to the circumambulation  performed  by the human  
beings  round  the Ka'bah.  But since most  of the people,  according  to their rank,  
short  of performing  such circumambulation,  they were  commanded  to imitate  
them as much as it is within their capacity,  and given promise  that he who  
imitates  a people  should  belong  to them (according  to the narration  of Abu  
Dawud  on the authority  of Ibn Umar).  However,  he who has power  to perform  
such circumambulation  is him, about  whom  it is said that the Ka'bah  visits him,  
and circumambulates  him, according  to what  one of the inspired  men saw from  
one of the devotees  of Allah  Almighty.
As for touching  (the Corner  of the Black Stone),  you should  have the 
impression  that you give the pledge  of allegiance  to Allah  Almighty,  to hearken  
and obey Him. So, be determined  in your decision  to fulfill your pledge  of 
allegiance,  for he who proves  treacherous  in his pledge  deserves  the wrath  (and  
punishment  of Allah Almighty).  In this context,  it is narrated  on the authority  
of Ibn Abbas  that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon515
are


Page 518:
516 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
him" said: "The Black  Stone  is the Right  Hand  of Allah  on earth,  therewith  He 
shakes  hands  with His creatures,  in the same way as a man shakes  hands  with  
his brother."
As for hanging  in the curtains  of the Ka'bah,  and getdng  stuck to the 
Multazam,  let your  intention  be the commitment  to seek the nearness  in love and 
longing  for the House  and for the Lord of the House,  and the bless of touching,  
and the hope  to safeguard  from the fire (of Hell) all parts of your body,  and not 
only in the House.  Moreover,  let your  intention  in the hanging  in the curtains  be 
the persistent  invocation  for Allah's Forgiveness,  and asking for safety and 
security,  just like a sinful  who hangs in the dress of him against  whom  he has 
committed  the sin, who implores  him to excuse  him, and shows  to Him that 
there  is no refuge  from him but to him, and no salvation  for him but through  His 
Generosity  and Pardon;  and that he would  not leave  the tail of his garment  unless  
he is forgiven  and given  security  in the future.
As for compassing  Safa and Marwah  round  in the courtyard  of the House,  
it resembles  the servant's  going  and returning  in the courtyard  of the House  of 
the king, one after another,  in demonstration  of sincerity  in service,  and 
expectation  of being  observed  with the eye of mercy,  just as the one who enters  
into the presence  of a king, and then comes  out from him, and he does not 
know  whether  the king's decision  concerning  him is in favour  of, or against  
him; and thus he keeps  coming  back to the courtyard  of the house,  one after  
another,  in the hope  of receiving  mercy  in the next time if he does not receive  it 
in the first time. Furthermore,  let him remember,  while running  to and fro 
between  Safa and Marwah,  his fluctuation  between  both scales  of the balance  in 
the plain land of the Day of Judgement.  Let him, in this connection,  liken Safa  
to the scale of the good deeds,  and Marwah  to that of the evil deeds,  and thus  
remember  his fluctuation  between  both scales, with his eyes watching  the 
increase  and decrease  in weight, fluctuating  between  chastisement  and 
forgiveness.
As for standing  at Arafah,  let you remember,  from what you see, of the 
people's  thronging  and raising  their voices,  in their different  languages,  and 
following  the steps and imitating  their imams  who are of different  doctrines  and 
views,  in their visitations  of the Monuments,  the plain ground  of the Day of 
Judgement,  when all the peoples  and nations  will gather together  with their  
Prophets  and Messengers,  each in imitation  of its Prophet,  and longing  for his 
intercession,  and wavering  in this one plain ground  between  acceptance  and 
rejection.  If you remember  all of that, let your heart  adhere  to supplication  and 
imploration  of Allah Almighty,  perchance  you will be mustered  in the company  
of the winners  upon whom  mercy  is bestowed.  Furthermore,  be assured  of the 
fact that your hope will be responded  to, since the standing  is noble,  and the 
mercy  reaches  from the Presence  of Majesty  to all of the people  through  the dear  
hearts  of the Stakes  of the Earth.
However,  the place  of standing  (at Arafat)  could  hardly  be void of a group  of 
the Substitutes  (Abdal)  and Awtad  (Stakes),  and a group  of the righteous  and


Page 519:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage  
masters  of hearts.  If all of their concerns  gather  together,  and all of their hearts  
are entirely  devoted  to supplication  and invocation,  and their hands rise up to 
Allah Almighty,  their necks  stretch  and their sights  are lifted up towards  the sky, 
and all having  one mind,  i.e. to ask for Allah's  Mercy,  think  not then that He will 
disappoint  them, or suffer to be lost their endeavour,  or even withhold  from  
them His Mercy  which  embraces  them  all. For this reason,  it is said that one of 
the greatest  sin is that one attend  (the standing  of) Arafah,  and, at the same  time,  
think  that Allah  Almighty  will not forgive  for him. It seems  as if the agreement  of 
all minds  on the one hand,  and the reliance  upon  the proximity  of the Substitutes  
and Stakes  who gather  from  all directions  of countries  is the real mystery  and the 
final purpose  of Hajj. There  is no way to elicit  the Mercy  of Allah  Almighty  other  
than the agreement  of minds  and the co-operation  of hearts  at the same  time.
As for throwing  the Jimar (with pebbles),  let your purpose  from it be to 
submit  to the command  (of Allah  Almighty),  in confirmation  of your slavery  and 
bondage,  which  arises you (to do the act) only in compliance  (with the order),  
with no benefit  the mind  or the soul might  receive  from it. let you r purpose  in it 
be to imitate  Abraham  "Peace  be upon him",  when  Iblis "Allah's  Curse  be upon  
him" appeared  to him at that place, in order to arouse  suspicion  in his heart  
about  his pilgrimage,  or to seduce  him to do a sin, whereupon  Allah Almighty  
ordered  him to throw him with the stones,  to avert him, and put him to 
depression.  But if it occurs  in your mind that 'it is because  Satan  appeared  to him 
and he saw him with his own eyes that he threw  him, whereas  for me, Satan  does  
not appear  to me (and thus there  is no point  to throw  him)',  it should  be known  
to you then that this passing  thought  occurs  to your mind from  Satan,  and it is he 
who whispers  it into your heart,  in order  to weaken  your power  of throwing,  and 
give you the false impression  that this act is of no benefit,  as being  similar  to 
playing  by which  you should  not bother  yourself.
But even,  you should  avert  that passing  thought  away  from your heart,  with  
serious  resolution  and endeavour  to throw  him, against  the will of Satan.  You  
should  put in mind here that it is true that you apparently  throw  (the Jamrah  
of) Aqabah  with stones,  but in reality,  you throw  them at the face of Satan,  
and break his back, for nothing  puts him to humiliation  other than your  
submission  to the Command  of Allah Almighty,  in exaltation  of Him, only  
through  following  an order, even with no benefit  the mind or soul might  
receive  from it.
As for slaughtering  the sacrificial  animals,  you should  know that this is to 
bring you much closer to Allah Almighty,  through  your submission  to His 
Commands.  So, you should  complete  it, in the hope that Allah Almighty  would  
release,  by each part of it, a part of your body from the fire (of Hell). As such is 
the promise  (given  by Allah Almighty):  the greater  the sacrificial  animal  is, and 
the more ample  the parts of its body are, the more embracing  your redemption  
from the fire (of Hell) will be.
As for visiting  Medina,  once your sight falls upon its walls, you should  
remember  that it is the city chosen  by Allah  Almighty  for His Messenger  "Allah's517


Page 520:
518 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him”, and made  the place  of his migration;  and that it 
was his abode,  in which  he laid the foundation  of the obligations  and duties  
enjoined  by his Lord Almighty,  in addition  to his tradition,  strove  his enemies,  
and promulgated  his religion  in it until Allah Almighty  took him (onto His 
Presence  by death),  and in which  also He Almighty  placed  the burial  ground  of 
him, as well as the burial  ground  of his ministers,  who undertook  the matter  with  
truth  after  his death  (i.e. Abu Bakr  and Umar).
Then,  imagine  within  yourself  the places  of the feet of the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" on his going  about  in the city, putting  
in mind  that there  is no place  you tread but that it was trodden  by his dear feet:  
so, do not place your foot on it but with tranquility  and in awe. Remember  also 
his walking  and traversing  across its roads and streets, and imagine  his 
submission  and tranquility  during  his walking,  and such of his great  acquaintance  
with Allah as He Almighty  trusted  in his heart, (and remember  also) how He 
raised  the esteem  (in which)  he (was held) so much  high that He Almighty  joined  
his remembrance  with the remembrance  of Himself,  and how He Almighty  
rendered  fruidess  the deed of him who violated  his sanctity  even through  raising  
his voice  over  his.
Furthermore,  remember  the favour  which  Allah  Almighty  bestowed  upon  
those who enjoyed  of the privilege  and honour  of his company,  and were  
blessed  with seeing  him and hearing  his speech,  and make  great  your sorrow  
and regret  for what  you missed  of his company  as well as the company  of his 
companions.  Remember  here that his vision  had escaped  you in this world,  
and his vision  in the hereafter  is at risk, and that you might  not see him but 
with sigh and grief, as being  rejected  by him because  of your evil deeds,  in 
accordance  with the statement  of the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" (as shown  in the narration  of both Sahihs  and others  on 
the authority  of Abdullah  Ibn Mas'ud  and Anas): "Some people  will be 
brought  by Allah  Almighty  before  me (while  I'm standing  at the Fount-lake),  
and they will call me: "O Muhammad!"  I will say: "O my Lord!  Those  are my 
companions!"  He will then say: "You do not know  what they innovated  after  
you (had left them concerning  religion)."  On that I will say: "Let him be far 
(away  from Allah's  Mercy)  and let him perish  (who changed  anything  in the 
religion  after  me)!"
However,  if you are heedless  of the sanctity  of his law, even (as little) as a 
minute  thing,  you then will not be secure  to be hindered  from him because  of 
your  deviation  from his right  way. But make  great  your hope that Allah  Almighty  
would  not hinder  you from him, particularly  after He Almighty  had endowed  you 
with faith, and brought  you out of your country  for the sole purpose  of visiting  
him, with no (intention  to practice)  trade  or to receive  any material  benefit  in this 
world,  but just because  of your mere liking  and longing  for looking  at his traces  
and at the wall of his grave;  and as long as it is only for the sake of this that you 
have been prompted  to make this journey  just because  his vision  had escaped  
you, how worthy  you would  be of having  Allah Almighty  look at you with the 
Eye of His mercy!


Page 521:
Book  seven:  the mysteries  of pilgrimage
When  you reach  the mosque,  put in mind  that it is the ground  chosen  by Allah  
Almighty  for His Prophet  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him",  as well as 
for the first generation  and the best of Muslims,  and that the obligations  and 
duties enjoined  by Allah Almighty  were established  first in this place, which  
gathered  the best of Allah's  creatures,  in his life and death.  So, make  great your  
hope in Allah  Almighty  that He should  bestow  mercy  upon  you because  of your  
entering  it. enter  it then in humility  and showing  exaltation.  How  fitting  this place  
is to bring  about  humility  from the heart of every faithful  believer  according  to 
the narration  on the authority  of Abu Sulaiman  in which  he said: Abu Uwais  Al- 
Qarni  performed  Hajj, and then he entered  Medina;  and when he stood at the 
gate of the mosque,  it was said to him: "This  is the grave  of the Prophet  "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon him", thereupon  he fell unconscious,  and when  he 
recovered  he said: "Drive  me away, for it is not befitting  for me to live in a 
country  in which Muhammad  "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" is 
buried."
As for your  visiting  (the grave  of) the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace be upon him", you should  stand in front of him as we have described  
earlier,  and visit him while he was dead in the same way as you should  have  
visited  him had he been alive; and approach  his grave not but as well as you 
should  have approached  him had he been alive; and as well as you would  not 
have observed  his sanctity  by neither  touching  nor kissing  him, but by your  
standing  afar in front  of him (had he been  alive),  you should  also do the same,  fo 
indeed,  touching  and kissing  the monuments  are the customs  of both  Jews anc 
Christians.
You should  also learn that he "Peace  be upon him" is well-aware  of your  
presence,  standing  (before  him) and visit, and that your salutation  and invoking  
for (Allah's)  prayer  and blessing  reach him. For this reason,  you should  picture  
his honoured  person  as placed  in the grave in your mind, and bring about  his 
lofty and great rank in your heart. Indeed,  it is narrated  (by An-Nasa'i,  Ibn 
Hibban  and Al-Hakim  on the authority  of Ibn Mas'ud)  that the Messenger  of 
Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" entrusted  his grave  to an angel,  in 
order  to convey  to him the salutation  of such of his nation  as pays him salutation.  
If this applies  to such as does not attend  (to visit his grave),  then, what about  
him, who leaves  his homeland  and covers  the long desert  in longing  for meeting  
him, and is satisfied  with the vision  of his honoured  monument,  since  he missed  
the vision  of his honoured  countenance?  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  
and peace be upon him" said (according  to the narration  of Muslim  on the 
authority  of Abu Hurairah):  "He, who invokes  (for Allah's)  prayer  and blessing  
upon  me once,  Allah  sends  His Prayer  and Blessing  upon  him ten times."  If this 
is the reward  of him who invokes  (Allah's)  Prayer  and Blessing  upon him only  
with his tongue,  what  then about  him who attends  in person  to visit him?
Then,  go to the pulpit  of the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon  him",  and take on the impression  of his ascent  to the pulpit,  and picture519


Page 522:
520 The quarter  of the acts of worship
in your  heart  his brilliant  countenance,  as if he were on the pulpit,  surrounded  by 
both the Muhajirs  and the Ansar,  as he "Peace  be upon  him" was urging  them  in 
his sermon  to obey Allah (and comply  with His Commands).  Then,  ask Allah  
Almighty  not to separate  you from  him on the Day of  Judgement.
This is the duty of the heart  as far as the works  of Hajj are concerned.  Once  
he finishes  from  all of them,  let him adhere  to sadness,  anxiety  and fear, as being  
uncertain  whether  his pilgrimage  will be accepted  and thus he will be enlisted  in 
the company  of the beloved  ones,  or it is rejected  from him, and thus he will be 
enrolled  in the company  of the driven  ones. Let him know  that from the works  
of his heart:  if he notices  that his heart comes  to have greater  desertion  towards  
the abode  of deception  and rather  diverted  more to the abode  of company  with  
Allah  Almighty,  and finds that his works  have been achieved  in accordance  with  
the balance  of law, he should  then be assured  of having  his Hajj accepted  (by 
Allah  Almighty),  for indeed,  Allah Almighty  never  accepts  but from whomever  
He loves,  and if He loves anyone,  he puts him under  His Protection  and makes  
the traces  of His Love  appear  on him, and withholds  from  him the power  of his 
enemy  Iblis "Allah's  Curse  be upon  him".  If that is visible  on him, it will indicate  
to the acceptance  (of his pilgrimage  by Allah  Almighty).  But if what appears  on 
him is the opposing  one, then,  he will be about  to have no portion  of his journey  
but trouble  and weariness:  we seek refuge  with  Allah  Almighty  from  that.


Page 523:
.1itegfesyai-g r($CGe.sl ?'oe mtm  £dt£qtj0] »
In the Name  of Allah,  Most  Gracious,  Most  Merciful
Praise  be to Allah,  Who has bestowed  His Favour  upon His servants  with  
(sending)  His Prophet  (whom  He) sent (to all of men and jinns),  and with His 
Revealed  Book,  which  " No falsehood  can approach  from before  or behind  it: it 
is sent down  by One Full of Wisdom,  Worthy  of all Praise"  (Fussilat  42)
i ?23> o* cj? V3 ox & "5}
That through  which  the way of consideration  has been extended  for those  of 
thoughts,  with such of narrations  and news as it contains,  and the following  of 
the straight  method  and the even path has become  clear, through  explaining  in 
detail the different  judgements  and commandments  and what is lawful  has been  
distinguished  and separated  from what  is unlawful  in it. verily,  it is the Light  and 
luminosity,  by which  one attains  the salvation  from  deception,  and in which  there  
is healing  for such (of diseases  and ailments)  as lurk in the breasts.
Allah Almighty  breaks  the back of anyone  of tyrants  who opposes  it, and 
leaves to stray him who seeks knowledge  in anything  else other than it. it the 
constant  rope of Allah  Almighty  (which  He stretches  for the people  to hold fast 
by it), and His Clear Light. It is the most trustworthy  hand-hold,  and the all- 
embracing  bulwark  . it is encompasses  the little as well as the much,  the small  as 
well as the great. Its marvels  never  vanish,  as well as its wonderful  things  never  
end. Its (infinite)  benefits  are beyond  limitation  in the sight  of those  endued  with  
knowledge,  nor it is consumed  up by reciting  it so much  repeatedly  in the sight  of 
its reciters.  It is that which  guided  the foremost  as well as the last (generations);  
and the jinns had no sooner  heard  it, than they turned  to their nation  as warners,  
saying:  "We have really heard  a wonderful  Recital!  It gives  guidance  to the Right,  
and we have believed  therein:  we shall not join (in worship)  any (gods)  with our 
Lord."  (Al-Jinn  1:2)
{ *0 CJ- blV} lie- bj ijJui  3) lf-3\ f
i «i (0) lai i j-Ljil  j) (j.lJ:
Verily,  he who believes  in it has, indeed,  been guided  to success,  and he who  
talks with it has indeed  told the truth,  and he who abides  by it has indeed  guided  
(to the right  way),  and he who acts upon  it has indeed  attained  felicity.
Allah Almighty  says: "We have, without  doubt,  sent down  the Message;  and 
We will assuredly  guard  it (from  corruption)."  (Al-Hijr  9)
i 0 o X bJ3 r#  Uj> £■ >
However,  it is out of the ways of guarding  it in the hearts,  as well as in (a
521


Page 524:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
written  form in) Mushafs,  the continuous  recitation,  and regular  studies  of it, in 
addition  to undertaking  its proprieties  and conditions,  and guarding  such of 
internal  works  and external  deeds  as it contains.  All of that could  be explained  in 
detail  under  four chapters:
The first chapter  deals with the excellence  of the Holy  Qur'an,  and the good  
merits  of its people  (who  recite  and act upon  it regularly).
The second  chapter  discusses  the outward  proprieties  of its recitation.
The third chapter  talks about  the inward  works  which  should  be observed  on 
reciting  it.
The fourth chapter  investigates  the (different  ways of) understanding  and 
interpretation  of the Holy  Qur'an  depending  upon  intellect  and the like of it.522
CHAPTER  ONE:  ON THE EXCELLENCE  OF THE HOLY  QUR  AN AND  ITS 
PEOPLE  AND CRITICIZING  THE NEGLECTFUL  OF RECITING  IT
The Excellence  Of The Holy Qur'an
From  amongst  the Prophetic  traditions  in this connection,  a mention  might  be 
made  here of the following:
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "He,  
who (is given  the blessing  of) reciting  the Qur'an  (competently  and acting  upon  
it) and he sees anyone  being  given  something  better  than it, has indeed  make  little  
what  Allah  Almighty  has exalted."  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" said: "There  is no intercessor,  better  in rank in the Sight  of 
Allah Almighty,  than the Holy Qur'an,  and there is no Prophet,  nor angel,  nor 
anyone  else (has such superiority  as the Qur'an  has)." the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "If the Holy Qur'an  is kept in a 
hide, no fire could  touch  it." the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon  him" said: "The  best religious  service  done  by my nation  is the recitation  
of the Holy  Qur'an."
The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" further  said:  
"Allah  Almighty  had recited  both  Surahs  of Ta Ha and Ya Sin one thousand  years  
before He created  the creatures.  When the angels heard the Qur'an  (being  
recited)  they said: "Blessed  be a nation  upon  which  this Qur'an  is revealed;  and 
blessed  be the insides  (of men) which  carry  it; and blessed  be the tongues  which  
utter it." the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said:  
"The best among  you is he, who learns  the Holy Qur'an,  and then teaches  it (to 
others)."  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said:  
"Allah  "Blessed  and Exalted  be He" says: 'He, whom  the recitation  of the Holy  
Qur'an  diverts  from invoking  and begging  Me, I give the best reward  of the 
thankful  and grateful'."
(It is narrated  by At-Tirmidhi  on the authority  of Ibn Umar that the 
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him")  said: "Three  (types  
of persons)  will (be made  to stand)  on a sand hill of black  musk  on the Day of 
Judgement,  who will not be frightened  by reckoning  nor will they be harmed  by 
fear, until the cases of the people  will be decided:  a man who used to recite the i


Page 525:
Book  eight:  The proprieties  of reciting  the qur'an  
Holy Qur'an,  seeking  only the Countenance  of Allah Almighty,  and to lead a 
people  on their own accord;  a man who used to pronounce  the Call to prayer  
(Adhan)  in a mosque,  and invoke  Allah just for the sake of the Countenance  of 
Allah  Almighty;  and a man who was examined  by a large sustenance  in his world,  
even though  this did not divert  him from  doing  the deeds  of the hereafter."
The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" further  said:  
"The  people  of the Holy  Qur'an  is also Allah's  people  and elite (from  among  His 
creatures)."  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him"  
said: "No doubt,  the hearts  are rusted  in the same  way as iron is." It was said: "O 
Messenger  of Allah! what does polish them?"  he said: "The recitation  of the 
Qur'an",  and he made a mendon  of death, the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said too: "Verily,  Allah  Almighty  is more  eager  
to hear the reciters  of the Qur'an than an owner of a songstress  to his 
songstress."
Now  let's mendon  the sayings  (of the ancients):
Abu Umamah  Al-Bahili  said: "Recite  the Qur'an,  and do not be deceived  by 
those  hung  Mushafs,  for indeed  Allah  Almighty  never  punishes  a heart  which  is a 
container  of the Qur'an."  Ibn Mas'ud  said: "If you like (to acquire)  knowledge,  
you should  then spread  out the Qur'an,  for it has the knowledge  of he foremost  
as well as the last (generations  of this world)."  He further  said: "You  should  recite  
the Qur'an,  for indeed  you are given  as much  reward  for it as ten good deeds  for 
each letter. Behold!  I do not say that 'ALM"  is one letter, but rather  "A" is a 
letter, "L" is a letter, and "M" is a letter."  He said too: "Let none of you ask 
(anyone)  about  himself  barring  the Qur'an:  if he loves the Qur'an  and admires  it, 
he indeed  loves  Allah  Almighty  and His Messenger  "Peace  be upon him",  and if 
he hates it, he indeed  hates Allah  Almighty  and His Messenger  "Peace  be upon  
him"."523
Amr Ibn Al-As  said: "Every  Holy  Verse  in the Qur'an  (raises  its reciter  up) 
a degree  (high) in the Garden,  and constitutes  a (source  of) light in your  
houses."  He further  said: "He who recites  the Qur'an  (and acts upon it as it 
should  be) has the characteristics  of Prophethood  between  both his sides,  
except  that he does not receive  Divine  revelation."  Abu Hurairah  said: "No  
doubt,  the house  wherein  the Qur'an  is being  recited  becomes  too spacious  to 
embrace  its people,  has abundance  of good,  in which  the angels  are present,  
and from which  devils  come out; and the house  in which  the Book  of Allah  
Almighty  is not recited  becomes  too narrow  and constricted  upon  its people,  
turns to be short  of good,  in which  the devils  are present,  and from  which  the 
angels  come  out."
Ahmad  Ibn Hanbal  said: "I saw Allah  in a dream,  whereupon  I asked  him: "O 
Lord! What is the best thing through  which  those near unto You become  so 
much  closer  to You?"  he said: "It is through  My Speech  O Ahmad."  I asked:  "O 
Lord! Is it with understanding  it or without  understanding  it?" He said: "With  
understanding  it, as well as without  understanding  it." according  to Muhammad  
Ibn Ka'b Al-Qurzhi:  "When  the people  will hear the Qur'an  (being  recited  by)


Page 526:
524 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
Allah on the Day of Judgement,  they will seem as if they have never heard it 
before  that."  According  to Al-Fudail  Ibn Iyad: "The carrier  of the Qur'an  should  
not be in need of anyone,  and even to the rulers  and those  inferior  to them (in 
rank);  and that's  because  all of the people  should  be in need of him." He further  
said: "The carrier  of the Qur'an  is also the carrier  of the flag of Islam.  So, he 
should  not play with him who plays,  nor should  he become  heedless  with him 
who is heedless,  nor should  he speak with falsity  with him who speaks  with  
falsity,  in exaltation  and adoration  of the Qur'an."
According  to Sufyan  Ath-Thawri:  "If one recites  the Holy Qur'an,  an angel  
will kiss in between  his eyes."  According  to Amr Ibn Maimun:  "He, who spreads  
out a Mushaf  in front of him in the Morning  prayer,  from which  he recites  as 
many  as one hundred  Holy  Verses,  Allah  Almighty  raises  to him as (much  reward  
as is equal to the reward  of) the deeds  of all the inhabitants  of this world."  It is 
narrated  that Khalid  Ibn Uqbah  came  to the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  
and peace be upon him" and asked him to recite the Holy Qur'an  to him. He 
recited  to him: " Allah  commands  justice,  the doing  of good,  and liberality  to kith 
and kin, and He forbids  all shameful  deeds, and injustice  and rebellion:  He 
instructs  you, that you may receive  admonition."  (An-Nahl  90)
He asked  him once again,  and he repeated  it, thereupon  he commented:  "By 
Allah!  it (the Holy Qur'an)  has a sweetness,  and it is adorned  with charm,  (and it 
is like a tree) whose  lower  part is full of (green)  leaves,  and whose  upper  part is 
full of fruits;  and of a surety,  it is not within  the reach  of the power  of any human  
being  to say (the like of) this."
According  to Al-Hassan:  "By Allah!  there  is no richness  other  than that of the 
Qur'an,  and there is no destitution  with it." according  to Al-Fudail:  "He, who  
recites  the concluding  portion  of the Surah of Al-Hashr  in the morning,  after  
which  he dies on that day, will be sealed  with the stamp  of the martyrs;  and He, 
who recites  the concluding  portion  of the Surah  of Al-Hashr  in the evening,  after  
which  he dies on that night,  will be sealed  with the stamp  of the martyrs."  Al- 
Qasim  Ibn Abd Ar-Rahman  said: "I said to one of the devout  men: "There  is 
none here to enjoy  of his company."  He stretched  his hand towards  the Mushaf,  
which  he picked  and placed  on his lap and said: "It is this."  According  to Ali Ibn 
Abu Talib "Allah  be pleased  with him": "Three  things increase  the power  of 
retaining,  and remove  the phlegm  (sluggishness  and apathy):  to use toothpick,  to 
observe  fast, and to recite  the Qur'an."
On Criticizing  The Recitation  Of The Heedless
According  to Anas Ibn Malik: "How many a reciter  of the Qur'an,  even  
though  the Holy  Qur'an  curses  him!"  "Such  is the case of the Qur'an  when  it is in 
the inside  of the wicked"  according  to Maisarah  Al-Gharib.  According  to Abu  
Sulaiman  Ad-Darani:  "Verily,  the angels  of punishment  are swifter  to seize the 
carriers  of the Qur'an  who disobey  Allah  Almighty  than they are to the idolaters


Page 527:
Book  eight:  The proprieties  of reciting  the qur'an
when  they disobeyed  Allah  Almighty  after the (reveladon  of the) Qur'an."  One of 
the learned  men said: "If one recites  the Qur ’an, during  which  he is troubled,  and 
then he returns  to resume  recitation  once again,  it will be said to him: "You have  
nothing  to do with My Speech.""  Ibn Ar-Rammah  said: "I've regretted  for my 
keeping  of the Qur'an  for on the Day of Judgement,  the men of the Qur'an  will 
be questioned  about the same things about which the Prophets  will be 
questioned."
According  to Ibn Mas'ud:  "The carrier  of the Qur'an  should  be distinguished  
(from others)  by his (standing  for supererogatory  prayers  with the Qur'an)  at 
night,  when the people  sleep,  by (acting  upon the Qur'an  during  the) day when  
the people  indulge  (in doing  so), by his sadness  when the people  rejoice,  by his 
weeping  when the people  laugh,  by his silence  when the people  are engaged  in 
discourse,  by his humility  and submission  when the people  are arrogant  and 
haughty.  Furthermore,  the carrier  of the Holy Qur'an  should  be submissive  and 
lenient;  and it is not befitting  for him to be hard,  nor adulating,  nor loud-voiced,  
nor noisy,  nor bad-tempered."
The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "Most  
of the hypocrites  among  this nation  are from those  who recite the Qur'an."  the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" further  said: "Keep  
reciting  the Qur'an  as long as it desists  you (from  doing  what  is shameful);  and if 
it does not desist  you, then, recite it no more."  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him" also said: "He has no faith in the Qur'an,  who  
makes  lawful  what  is unlawful  in it."
One of the ancient  people  said: "A servant  might  inaugurate  a Surah  (from  the 
Qur'an),  thereupon  the angels  keep invoking  Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon  
him until he finishes  form it; and a servant  might  inaugurate  a Surah (from the 
Qur'an),  thereupon  the angels  keep invoking  for Allah's  Curse  upon  him until he 
finishes  from it." it was said to him: "How  is that?"  he said: "If he makes  lawful  
what is lawful  and makes  unlawful  what is unlawful  in it, the angels  will invoke  
Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon  him; otherwise,  they invoke  Allah's  Curse  upon  
him." According  to a learned  man: "One might recite the Qur'an,  and curses  
himself  even though  he knows  not, when  he says: "Behold!  Let Allah's  Curse  be 
upon the wrongdoers"  and he is unjust  to himself;  and: "Behold!  Let Allah's  
Curse  be upon those  who tell lies" and he is one of them."
Al-Hassan  said: "However,  you've  taken the recitation  of Qur'an  as journey-  
portions,  and take the night  as a riding  camel,  which  you ride in order  to cover  its 
journey-parts;  but those who were before  you considered  it as messages  from  
their Lord,  which  they studied  at night,  and acted  upon  by day." Ibn Mas'ud  said:  
"Verily,  the Qur'an  was revealed  to them in order  to act upon it, but they taken  
its study  as act; and one of you might  read the Qur'an  from  its commencement  to 
its conclusion,  missing  no letter  of it, even though  he has cancelled  out the acting  
upon  it."
It is narrated  (by Ibn Majah)  on the authority  of both Ibn Umar  and Jundub):  
We lived for a long time during  which  one of us might  have been given faith525


Page 528:
526 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
before  (his knowledge  of) the Qur'an,  and once a certain  Surah was revealed  
upon  Muhammad  "Peace  be upon  him",  he would  learn what  is lawful  and what  
is unlawful  in it, such of commands  and admonitions  as it contained,  and that at 
which  he should  stop (to reflect  and consider)  in it. afterwards,  I saw men,  one of 
whom  had been given (the knowledge  of) the Qur'an  before  faith, thereupon  he 
recited  it from the Opening  of the Book to its conclusion,  without  having  
knowledge  of such of commands  and admonitions  as it contained,  nor that at 
which  he should  stop (to consider)  in it; and that's because  he scattered  it in the 
same  way as the grains  would  be scattered.
According  to the Torah:  "O My servant!  Do you not feel shy of Me? You  
might  receive  a letter  from  anyone  of your brothers,  while  you are walking  in the 
street , whereupon  you turn aside  and sit in order  to read it carefully  and consider  
it letter  by letter  in order  that nothing  from it would  escape  you; whereas  this is 
My Book  which  I have sent to you: consider  how many  signs  I have explained  for 
you in it, and how many  I have  repeated  (My instructions)  in it in order  to reflect  
it entirely,  but even you turn your back to it: do you see that I'm more  
insignificant  in your sight than anyone  of your brothers?  O My servant!  One of 
your brothers  might sit with you, whereupon  you turn your face to him 
wholeheartedly  and pay attention  to his speech: if somebody  speaks, or 
something  seems  to engage  you from his speech,  you would  soon beckon  to him 
to keep silent;  but here I'm, turning  to you, speaking  with you, whereupon  you 
are turning  your back to Me: do you make Me more insignificant  in your sight  
than anyone  of your  brothers?"
CHAPTER  TWO:  ON THE OUTWARD  PROPRIETIES  OF RECITATION
Those  are ten, and they go as follows:
The first pertains  to the state of reciter:  he should  be in the state of 
ablution,  having  the signs of politeness  and tranquility,  whether  standing  or 
sitting,  facing  the Qiblah,  lowering  his head, without  crossing  his legs, nor 
reclining  nor sitting  in the state of arrogance  or haughtiness.  He should  sit in 
the same  way as he sits in front  of his teacher.  The best of his states  is that he 
should  recite in prayer  while standing  in the mosque,  for indeed,  this is the 
best deed.
But even,  if he recites  while  lying  on his bed, and not in the state of ablution,  
it will have its excellence,  though  lesser  than the former.  Allah Almighty  says: " 
Men  who celebrate  the praises  of Allah,  standing,  sitting,  and lying  down  on their  
sides, and contemplate  the (wonders  of) creation  in the heavens  and the earth,  
(with the thought):  "Our  Lord! not for naught  have you created  (all) this! Glory  
to You! Give  us salvation  from  the Penalty  of the Fire."  (A1 Imran  191)
y==^3  J*3 ‘3>**3  ^ oj/  L' oiAjT }
■ l '91*4 ''La
It is true that He Almighty  here praises  all, but at the same time, He brings  
forward  those who celebrate  while standing,  followed  by those who do whileL hjJ^/0^'3  <j Ojj


Page 529:
Book  eight:  The proprieties  of reciting  the qur'an ------------
sitting,  and then those  who do while  lying  down  on their  sides.
Ali Ibn Abu Talib "Allah  be pleased  with him" said: "He, who recites  the 
Qur'an  while standing  in prayer receive  for every letter as many as one 
hundred  good deeds;  and he who recites  it while  sitting  in prayer  receives  for 
each letter  as many  as fifty good deeds;  and he who recites  it while being  in 
the state of ablution,  but not in prayer,  receives  for each letter as many as 
twenty-five  good deeds;  and he who recites  it and he is not in the state of 
ablution  receives  for each letter  as many  as ten good deeds."  What  is recited  
during  the standing  for supererogatory  prayer  at night is more excellent,  for 
this helps  the heart  become  more  devoted  (to the religious  service).  According  
to Abu Dharr "Allah be pleased  with him" said: "The great number  of 
prostrations  during  the day, and the long standing  (for supererogatory  prayers)  
at night  are much  more  excellent."
The second  pertains  to the amount  of the Qur'an  (which  should  be recited).  
However,  the reciters  have different  ways and customs  in making  much  or litde  
the amount  which  they recite (each time). Some  of them read the Qur'an  to its 
conclusion  once  every  day and night,  some  twice,  and others  go as far as to recite  
it to its conclusion  even three times  every  day and night.  But some  of them read  
it to its conclusion  once per month.  But the best reference  of estimation  in this 
respect  is the statement  of The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon  him": "He, who recites  the Qur'an  in less than three days has, indeed,  not 
understood  it (as it should  be)." That's because  to increase  the rate of that 
prevents  its being  recited  perfectly.
On hearing  a man reading  the Qur'an  by way of narrating,  A'ishah  "Allah  be 
pleased  with her" said: "This  man has not read the Qur'an  (as it should  be read),  
nor has he kept silent."  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon  him" commanded  Abdullah  Ibn Amr to read the Qur'an  entirely  within  (no 
less than) a week.  This was the habit  of such companions  as Uthman,  Zaid Ibn 
Thabit,  Abdullah  Ibn Mas'ud,  and Ubai Ibn Ka'b "Allah  be pleased  with them",  
to read the Holy  Qur'an  entirely  every  week.
From  this point  of view,  it might  be said that reading  the Qur'an  entirely  is 
of four grades:  to read it entirely  every day and night, and it is disliked  by a 
group  of learned  men; to read it entirely  every month,  on the basis of a daily  
section.  As well as this latter is considered  to be an extremely  so little, the 
former  is regarded  also to be an extremely  so much.  However,  there are two 
moderate  grades  between  both  extremes,  one of which  is to read it entirely  once  
every  week,  and the other  twice  or nearly  thrice  every  week.  It is more  desirable  
to make the conclusion  of one of them at night of Friday,  in the two-rak'ah  
prayer  of Maghrib  or after it, and the other  on the daylight  of Monday,  in the 
two-rak'ah  prayer  of Fajr or after it, in order that he would  receive  the first  
portion  of both daylight  and night with such conclusion.  Indeed,  if he 
concludes  it at night, the angels "Peace  be upon him" keep invoking  Allah's  
Prayer and Blessing  upon him until morning  enters upon him, and if he 
concludes  it by daylight,  they keep invoking  Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon527


Page 530:
528 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
him until night enters  upon him; and in this way, their blessing  encompasses  
night  and daylight.
To explain  the amount  of recitation  in detail,  let's say that if he belongs  to the 
worshippers,  who follow  the way of the (practical)  work,  let his recitation  of the 
Qur'an  entirely  to its conclusion  be no less than twice  a week;  and if he belongs  
to the followers  of the way of the works  of the heart  and the methods  of thought,  
or to those  who are engaged  in spreading  knowledge,  there  is no blame  upon  him 
to be satisfied  with reciting  it entirely  once a week;  and if he belongs  to those  of 
piercing  reflections  on the meanings  of the Qur'an,  there is no harm to be 
satisfied  with reciting  it entirely  once  per month,  in view  of his need for repeating  
it and reflecting  on it so many  times.
The third  pertains  to the point  of division.  As for him who recites  the Holy  
Qur'an  entirely  once per week, let him divide  the Qur'an  into seven divisions.  
However,  the holy companions  divided  the whole of the Qur'an  into many  
divisions  (in facilitation  of recitation).  In this respect,  it is narrated  that Uthman  
"Allah  be pleased  with  him" used to start his recitation  of the Qur'an  on the night  
of Friday  from the Surah  of Al-Baqarah  until the end of Al-Ma'idah,  on the night  
of Saturday  from Al-An'am  to Hud, on the night of Sunday  from Yusuf  to 
Maryam,  on the night of Monday  from Ta Ha to Al-Qasas,  on the night of 
Tuesday  from  Al-Ankabut  to Sad, on the night  of Wednesday  from As-Sajdah  to 
Ar-Rahman,  and on the night  of Thursday,  he would  conclude  it. But the way Ibn 
Mas'ud  used to divide  it into many  parts  differed  from  that.
Furthermore,  it is said that the Qur'an  is of seven  divisions:  the first consists  
of three  Surahs,  the second  of five, the third of seven,  the fourth  of nine, the fifth  
of eleven,  the sixth of thirteen,  and the seventh  consists  of the (Surahs  of) the 
Mufassal,  beginning  from Qaf to the conclusion  of the Qur'an.  This is the way 
the companions  "Allah  be pleased  with them"  divided  the Qur'an,  and this was 
the way they recited  it. they depend  upon a narration  handed  down from The  
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him".  This was before  
the development  of other  kinds  of dividing  it into fifths,  tenths  and sections;  and 
what is beyond  that belongs  to the innovations  (which  has no reference  in the 
tradition  of the Prophet  and the companions  after  him).
The fourth  pertains  to writing.  It is desirable  to make good and clear the 
writing  of the Qur'an,  and there is no blame  to use dots and red signs, which  
embellish  it, and contribute  in its exposition,  and stand against  falling into  
mistakes  and errors on the part of him who recites  it. it is said that both Al- 
Hassan  and Ibn Sirin rejected  (the division  of the Qur'an  into) fifths,  tenths  and 
sections.  It is also narrated  that both Ash-Sha'bi  and Ibrahim  disliked  the use of 
dots and red signs,  and the acceptance  of charge  for that, and they used to call for 
depriving  the Qur'an  of all of that. I think they disliked  to open such door for 
fear it would  lead to the possibility  of additions  and they rather  favoured  to close  
the door (of differences  and disputations),  and were more eager to guard the 
Qur'an  from  such of changes  as might  befall  it, even though  it would  not result  in 
what  is forbidden.


Page 531:
Book  eight:  The proprieties  of reciting  the qur'an
The people  unanimously  agreed,  in this matter,  that there is no harm to use 
only what contributes  to the increase  of knowledge,  even though  it has been  
renovated,  for indeed,  how many  an innovated  matter  which  is good,  such as the 
establishment  of the Tarawih  prayer  in congregations  in the mosques,  which  is 
reported  to be innovated  by Umar  Ibn Al-Khattab  "Allah  be pleased  with him",  
and it is a good innovation,  unlike the blameworthy  innovation,  which  
contradicts  the traditional  sunnah,  and is about  to lead to changing  it.
One of the learned  men said: "I might  read from the dotted  Mushaf  even  
though  I do not make the dots myself."  According  to Al-Awza'i  who narrates  it 
from Yahya  Ibn Abu Kathir:  "The Mushaf  at first was void of dots, and the first 
to be innovated  was to place the dots on the letters  of Ba and Ta, saying  that 
there  is no harm  in it, since  it enlightens  its (letters  and distinguishes  it from  each  
other).  Then,  they innovated  the big dots at the end of the Holy Verses,  saying  
that there  is no harm  in it, since  by which  the beginning  of the Holy  Verses  could  
be distinguished  and known.  After  that, they innovated  the beginning  and ending  
signs."  Abu Bakr Al-Hudhaii  said: I asked Al-Hassan  about  the red dots in the 
Mushafs  and he asked  me: "What  are those  dots (and what  is their significance)?"
I said: "They  distinguish  by them the nominal  cases of words."  On that he said:  
"There  is no harm to distinguish  the nominal  cases of the words  of the Qur'an."  
Khalid  Al-Hadhdha'  said: "I visited  Ibn Sirin,  and found  him reciting  in a Mushaf  
whose  writing  implied  dots,  even though  he disliked  the use of dots in writing."
It is said that it was Al-Hajjaj  (Ibn Yusuf  Ath-Thaqafi)  who renovated  this 
(use of dots). He brought  the reciters  and commanded  them to count  the words  
and letters  of the Qur'an,  and divided  it into equal parts,  which  they made  into 
thirty sections,  each containing  other subsections  (i.e. each section  consists  of 
two parts (Hizb),  and each part consists  of eight  quarters).
The fifth pertains  to the recitation  in slow,  measured  rhythmic  tones;  and it is 
desirable,  for we are going  to explain  that the final purpose  of reciting  the Qur'an  
is to reflect  its meanings,  and such style of recitation  in a slow  measured  rhythmic  
tones helps achieve such contemplation.  For this reason, Umm Salamah  
described  (with  appreciation)  the manner  of recitation  of The Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him",  and behold!  She described  a manner  of 
articulate  recitation,  in which  each letter  is uttered  clearly.  Ibn Abbas  said: "It is 
dearer to me to recite both Al-Baqarah  and A1 Imran in a slow measured  
rhythmic  tones  and pleasant  voice  in which  I reflect  their meanings  than to read  
the whole  of the Qur'an  quickly  (with no consideration  of its meanings)."  He 
further  said: "It is dearer  to me to recite (no more than both Surahs  of) Az- 
Zalzalah  and Al-Qari'ah  in a slow measured  rhythmic  tones and pleasant  voice,  
and reflect  their meanings  than to recite  both Al-Baqarah  and A1 Imran  quickly  
(without  considering  their meanings)."  Mujahid  was asked  about  two men having  
entered  the prayer,  in which  their standing  was equal  (in length),  but one of them  
read only the Surah  of Al-Baqarah  and die odier  read the Holy Qur'an  entirely,  
thereupon  he said: "They  are equal  in reward."
It should  be known  to you that the recitadon  in a slow measured  rhythmic529


Page 532:
530 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
tones and pleasant  voice  is desirable,  not only for the purpose  of reflecting  and 
considering  its meanings,  since it is desirable  for the non-Arab  who could not 
understand  well the meanings  of the Qur'an  to recite it in a slow measured  
rhythmic  tones,  for this manner  is closer  to showing  veneration  and reverence,  
and more  impressive  than to recite  it quickly  and hastily.
The sixth pertains  to weeping.  Weeping  is desirable  in recitation.  The  
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said (according  
to the narration  of Ibn Majah  on the authority  of Sa'd Ibn Abu Waqqas):  " 
you should weep (on reflecting  its meanings);  and if you fail to weep  
(naturally),  force yourselves  to weep." The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him" further  said: "He does not belong  to us who  
does not recite the Qur'an  in a pleasant  sweet  voice."  Salih Al-Murri  said: I 
recited  the Holy Qur'an  to The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace be upon him" while I was in a dream,  thereupon  he said to me: "O 
Salih! This is the recitation:  where is then the weeping  (which  should  be 
concomitant  to it)?" Ibn Abbas said: "If you recite the (Holy Verse of) 
prostration  in which  Allah Almighty  is glorified,  do not hasten  to prostrate  
yourselves  until you weep first; and in case the eye of anyone  of you does not 
shed tears,  let him weep  with his heart."
The way of forcing  oneself  to weep  is to bring  about  grief  in his heart,  for it is 
from such grief  that weeping  develops.  In this respect,  The Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "The Qur'an  has been sent down  
for grief: so, if you recite  it, you should  entertain  sadness  (in your hearts)."  The  
way of bringing  about such sadness  (in one's heart) is to consider  such of 
warnings,  threats,  covenants  and pledges  as it contains,  and then ponder  on his 
indulgence  in following  such of commands  and admonitions  as it has, which  
inevitably  leads him to become  sad and go on weeping.  Therefore,  if he does not 
entertain  sadness  and weeping  like the masters  of pure hearts  and souls,  then,  let 
him weep on his loss of such sadness  and weeping,  which  is, to be sure, the 
greatest  disaster  one might  have.
The seventh  is to observe  the rights of such of Holy Verses  as he recites.  
Whenever  he comes  upon a Holy Verse  of prostration,  let him soon prostrate  
himself;  and let him do so whenever  he hears  from  someone  else a Holy  Verse  of 
prostration,  in case the reciter  himself  prostrates  himself,  on the condition  that he 
should  not fall in prostration  unless  he is in the state of purification  and ablution.  
There  are fourteen  Holy  Verses  of prostrations  in the Qur'an,  two of which  are in 
the Surah of Al-Hajj,  but there is none in the Surah of Sad. The least  
performance  of prostration  is to place his forehead  on the ground,  whereas  the 
most perfect  is to glorify  Allah  Almighty  and fall in prostration,  and supplicate  
Allah  Almighty  with such of supplication  as is relevant  to the Holy  Verse  which  
he has recited.
Whenever  he recites,  for example,  Allah's  statement:  "Only  those believe  in 
Our Signs, who, when they are recited  to them fall down in adoration,  and 
celebrate  the praises  of their  Lord,  nor are they (ever)  puffed  up with pride"  (As-  
Sajdah  15)


Page 533:
531 Book  eight:  The proprieties  of reciting  the qur'an
^ ^ ^ '^4—J
Thereupon  he says: "O Allah!  make  me of those  who prostrate  themselves  for 
Your Countenance,  exalt You with Your Praises;  and I seek refuge  with You  
from being of those who are too arrogant  to follow  Your Command  (and of 
those who are) puffed  up with pride before  Your devotees ”; and whenever  he 
recites  Allah's  saying:  " They fall down on their faces in tears, and it increases  
their (earnest)  humility ” (Al-isra'  109)
i (g; * £jU>-  ijfci  O&SiJ  Ojjij  >
Let him say: "O Allah!  make  me of those  who weep for Your  Sake, and bow  
to You in humility";  and the same  is true of each (Holy  Verse  of) prostradon.
Furthermore,  the same  conditions  of prayer  apply  to such prostration,  such as 
to cover  the private  parts, face the Qiblah,  purify  both garment  and body from  
excrements  and impurities.  If one is not in the state of purification  and ablution  
by the time he hears (a Holy Verse  of prostration),  let him offer the prostration  
once he gets purified  and performs  ablution.  In doing  it perfectly,  it is said that 
one should  utter  Takbir  while  raising  his hands  (up to the level of his shoulders)  
to assume  it, and then utter another  Takbir  in order  to fall down  in prostration,  
and then utter a third Takbir  to raise (from  the posture  of prostration)  and utter  
the salutation.  Others  added  to that the recitation  of Testification  (Tashahhud),  
and it has no reference  more than the analogy  to the prostration  of prayer,  ever  
though  it is unlikely.  What has been handed  down is the order to fall ir. 
prostration,  and thus it is this order that should  be followed,  and the Takbir  of 
falling  down is much closer to be the beginning,  and what is beyond  that is 
improbable.  The one led in prayer  should  not fall in prostration  unless  the imam  
himself  does,  and thus one should  not prostrate  for his own recitation  in case he 
is led in prayer.
The eighth  is that reciter  should  say in the beginning  of his recitation:  "I 
seek refuge  with Allah,  All-Hearing,  Ail-Knowing  from Satan,  the despised.  O 
Lord! I seek refuge  with You from the evil suggestions  of Satans,  and I seek  
refuge  with You O Lord from their presence  with me. Let him also recite  both  
Surahs  of An-Nas  and Al-Fatihah.  On finishing  from recitation,  let him say: 
"Allah  Almighty  has told the truth,  and the Messenger  of Allah has conveyed  
(the message  in full as he was commanded):  O Allah! make it a source  of 
benefit  to us, and bless us in it; praise  be to Allah,  Cherisher  and Sustainer  of 
the worlds;  and I ask for the forgiveness  of Allah, the Ever-Living,  Self-  
Subsisting,  Eternal."  Whenever,  during  his recitation,  he comes  upon a Holy  
Verse of Tasbih,  let him exalt (and exalt Allah Almighty),  and whenever  he 
comes  upon  a Holy  Verse  of supplication  and Istighfar  (asking  for forgiveness),  
let him supplicate  and ask for Allah  s forgiveness,  and if he comes  upon  
something  to be expected,  let him ask for it, and if he comes  upon something  
that is frightening,  let him seek refuge  (with Allah from it), doing  all of that 
with his tongue  or with his heart,  saying:  Exalted  be Allah!  we seek refuge  with\jJJL ijj^- 13] cr?y- >


Page 534:
532 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
Allah!  O Allah!  bestow  sustenance  upon  us! O Allah!  bestow  mercy  upon  us!"
It is narrated  on the authority  of Hudhaifah  that he said: I performed  
(supererogatory)  prayer  behind  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace be upon him", in which he began his recitadon  with the Surah of Al- 
Baqarah:  he did not come  upon  a Holy Verse  of mercy  but that he asked (Allah  
for His Mercy),  nor upon  a Holy  Verse  of punishment  but that he sought  refuge  
(with  Allah),  nor upon  a Holy  Verse  of transcendence  but that he glorified  (Allah  
Almighty).  Whenever  he finished,  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace be upon him" used to say at die conclusion  of the Qur'an:  "O Allah!  
bestow  mercy  upon me by virtue  of the Qur'an,  and make it for me a leader  (to 
the truth) a (source  of) light, guidance  and mercy.  O Allah!  remind  me of that 
which  I forget  of it, and teach  me that which  I do not know  of it, and endow  me 
with the blessing  of reciting  it at the hours of the night and both ends of the 
daylight,  and make it an argument  in my favour  (on the Day of Judgement)  O 
Cherisher  and Sustainer  of the worlds."
The ninth pertains  to the recitadon  aloud. There is no doubt  that one 
should  recite  aloud  enough  at least to the extent  that makes  him here himself,  
since the recitadon  is to read letters  ardculately,  which requires  a voice,  in 
which  he could  manage,  at least to hear himself.  But if he is not able to hear  
himself,  his prayer  becomes  invalid.  But as to make his recitadon  audible  to 
others,  it is desirable  on one point,  and undesirable  on another  point.  The  
following  narration  attests  the desirability  of reading  in a low tone, in which  
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "The  
superiority  of the recitation  in a low tone to the recitadon  aloud is like the 
superiority  of the charity  to be given in secrecy  to that which  is given in 
public."
According  to another  version:  "He who recites  the Qur'an  aloud is like him 
who gives in charity  publicly,  and he who recites  the Qur'an  in a low tone is like 
him who gives in charity  secretiy."  According  to a common  tradition:  "The deed  
which  is done  in secret  is seventy  times superior  to that which  is done  in public."  
The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" also said: "The  
best of sustenance  is that which  suffices  one's (necessary)  requirements;  and the 
best of celebrations  is that which  is hidden."  In another  tradition:  "Let none of 
you recite the Qur'an  aloud (to the extent  of confusing)  each other (in the 
supererogatory  prayer)  between  Maghrib  and Isha'."
One night, Sa'id Ibn Al-Musayyab  heard Umar Ibn Abd Al-Aziz  in the 
mosque  of The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him"  
reciting  the Qur'an  aloud  in his prayer,  and he had a pleasant  voice,  thereupon  he 
said to his servant:  "Go to this praying  man, and tell him to lower  his voice in 
recitation."  The servant  said: "Verily,  the mosque  is not for us particularly  (apart  
form others),  and the visitors  should  have a portion  in it." on that Sa'id raised  his 
voice and said: "O praying  man! If you intend  Allah Almighty  with your prayer,  
you should  then lower your voice,  and if you intend  the people,  (you should  
know  that) they will not avail you without  Allah Almighty."  Umar  Ibn Abd Al-


Page 535:
Book  eight:  The proprieties  of reciting  the qur'an
Aziz kept silent  and shortened  his prayer.  When  he finished  from his prayer  he 
took his sandals  and turned  away; and at that time, he was the governor  of 
Medina.
On the other hand, the desirability  of reciting  aloud is confirmed  by the 
narration  in which  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" heard  one day a group  of his companions  reciting  the Qur'an  aloud  in their  
night  prayer,  of which  he approved.  The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace be upon him" said: "if anyone  of you stands at night (to offer the 
supererogatory  prayer)  let him recite  aloud,  for indeed  the angels  and the house  
dwellers  listen  to his recitation  and pray  with his prayer."
Once,  The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" came  
upon three of his companions  "Allah be pleased  with them" and all were in 
different  states  (in their  prayer):  he came  upon  Abu Bakr  who was reciting  Qur'an  
in a low tone, and when he asked him about  that he said: "No doubt,  he with  
Whom  1 have a private  discourse  assuredly  hears  me well." He came  upon Umar  
who was reciting  aloud,  and when  he asked  him about  that he said: "In order  to 
awaken  the sleeping  one and avert the devil."  He then came upon Bilal and he 
was reciting  a Verse from a certain  Surah  and a Verse  from another  Surah,  and 
when he asked him about that he said: "I mix good with good."  On that The 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "All of you 
have  done  well, and right."
The point  of combining  those  different  narrations  is that reciting  in a low tone  
is farther  from showing  off and ostentation,  and it is better  for him who fears  
that for himself.  But if one has no such fear, and, at the same time, his recitation  
aloud  does not confuse  other  praying  men, then, reciting  aloud  becomes  better,  
for the work exerted  therein  is much on the one hand, and because  its benefit  
returns  to others  (who listen to it); and of a surety,  the transitive  good  is better  
than the intransitive.  Furthermore,  it awakens  the heart  of the reciter,  and causes  
his attention  to concentrate  on reflecting  it, and diverts his hearing  to it 
unreservedly.  Raising  the voice also averts slumber,  increases  his activity  of 
reciting,  and diminishes  his laziness.  With his recitation  aloud,  one expects  to 
awaken  the sleeping  one, which  thus makes  him a direct  cause of giving  life to 
him (by causing  him to get up and stand  for the night  prayer).  On the other  hand,  
one who is idle and heedless  might  see him, and is stimulated  by his activity  and 
become  eager to do the service.  So, once he has any of those intentions,  the 
recitation  aloud becomes  much better for him; and if he has all of those  
intentions  together,  his reward  will be multiplied.  Verily,  the greater  the good  
intentions  are in number,  the higher  the deeds  of the righteous  rise, and the more  
their rewards  multiplied:  if with one deed a person  has ten intentions,  his reward  
thereof  will be multiplied  ten times.
For this reason,  we say that to recite  the Qur'an  in the Mushafs  is better,  for it 
adds to the deed the view, reflection  and carrying  of the Mushaf,  because  of 
which  the reward  increases.  It is said that the (reward  of the) religious  service  (of 
reciting  the Qur'an)  in a Mushaf  is seven (times  greater),  because  looking  at the533


Page 536:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
Mushaf  is also a kind of worship.  Uthman  "Allah be pleased  with him" is 
reported  to have torn two Mushafs  in view of his reciting  in them so much.  
However,  a great  number  of the holy companions  used to recite  in Mushafs,  and 
disliked  to have  a day come  upon  them  without  looking  at the Mushafs.  One day,  
one of the jurisprudents  of Egypt  visited  Ash-Shafi'i  a short time before  dawn,  
and there  was a Mushaf  in front  of him. Ash-Shafi'i  said to him: "No doubt,  the 
contemplation  has diverted  you from  the Qur'an.  I offer  the Isha' prayer  and then  
place  the Mushaf  in front  of me, and does not fold it until morning  enters  upon  
me."534
The tenth  is to make  perfect  the reading,  and reciting  the Qur'an  in a slow  
measured  rhythmic  tones through  quivering  voice, without  exceeding  in 
protracting  it to such an extent  as to change  its structural  syntax:  of a surety,  
this is out of the sunnah.  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon  him" said (according  to the narration  of Abu Dawud,  An-Nasa'i,  Ibn 
Majah  and Ibn Hibban  on the authority  of Al-Bara'  Ibn Azib): "Adorn  the 
(recitation  of the) Qur'an  through  (making  pleasant)  your voices."  (It is 
further  unanimously  narrated  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that) The  
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "Allah  
never  listens  to anything  in such a way as He listens  to a pleasant  voice  that is 
reciting  the Qur'an."  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon him" further  said: "He does not belong  to us who does not recite  the 
Qur'an  in a quivering  pleasant  voice."  (In comment  on this narration  it is said 
that he means 'who does not become  independent  (from others)  with the 
Qur'an';  and it is also said that he means  by it to vibrate  the voice  and follow  
good  tones  in recitation;  and this is much  closer  to the right understanding  in 
the sight  of the linguists).
(It is narrated  by Ibn Majah  on the authority  of A’ishah that)One  night,  the 
Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him” was waiting  
A'ishah  who delayed  to come  to him (after she had prayed  Isha),  and when she 
came  the Messenger  of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him” asked  her 
where she was, she said: “I was listening  to the recitation  of one of your  
companions,  the like of whose  recitation  and (sweet)  voice  I’ve never  heard  from  
anyone. ” He stood up and went to listen to him and then he returned  and said:  
“This is Salim,  the freed slave of Abu Hudhaifah:  Praise  be to Allah Who has 
endowed  my nation  with one like this (man). ”
One night,  the Messenger  of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him” 
listened  to the recitation  of Ibn Mas'ud,  and both  Abu Bakr  and Umar  were with  
him (the Prophet).  They  kept standing  for a long time, after which  he said: "He,  
who likes to read the Qur'an  in its state of freshness  and tenderness  in the same  
manner  as it was sent down,  let him read it according  to the way of reading  of 
Ibn Umm  Abd (the nickname  of Ibn Mas'ud)."
Once,  the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him” said 
to Ibn Mas'ud:  "Recite  (the Qur'an)  to me." He said: "O Messenger  of Allah!  
should  I recite the Qur'an  to you even though  it has been revealed  to you?" the


Page 537:
Book  eight:  The proprieties  of reciting  the qur’an
Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him” said: "I like to 
listen  to it being  recited  from  others."  He recited,  while  the eyes of the Messenger  
of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him” were  overflowing  with tears.
The Messenger  of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him” listened  to 
the recitation  of Abu Musa  Al-Ash'ari  thereupon  he said: “No doubt,  this (man)  
was granted  one of the sweet  melodious  voices  of the family  of David. ” When  
this reached  Abu Musa  he said: "O Messenger  of Allah!  Had I known  you w*ere  
listening,  I would  have adorned  its (recitation)  for you more perfectly."  Once,  
Haitham  the Reciter  saw the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be 
upon him” in his dream,  thereupon  he said: He then said to me: "Are you 
Haitham  who adorn  (the recitation  of) the Qur'an  through  (making  pleasant)  your  
voice?"  I answered  in the affirmative,  thereupon  he said: "Might  Allah  make  good  
your  reward."
According  to a certain  narration,  whenever  the companions  of the Messenger  
of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him” gathered,  they used to order  
one of them to recite  aloud  a Surah  from the Qur'an  before  them.  Umar  used to 
say to Abu Musa:  "Remind  us of our Lord."  We would  then keep reciting  in his 
presence  until it would  be the middle  of the time of prayer,  thereupon  it would  be 
said to him: "O Commander  of Believers!  (It is time for) prayer!  (It is time for) 
prayer!"  He would  say: "Are  we not in prayer?"
This is in reference  to Allah's  statement:  "and remembrance  of Allah is the 
greatest  (thing  in life) without  doubt."  (Al-Ankabut  45)535
The Messenger  of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him” said: "He,  
who listens  to a Holy  Verse  (being  recited)  from the Book  of Allah  Almighty,  it 
will be a (source  of) light for him on the Day of Judgement  (and according  to 
another  version  "and ten good deeds  will be written  for him")."  If the reward  of 
the listener  is great,  and it is the reciters  who causes  it, his (the reciter)  becomes  a 
partner  in that reward,  unless  his intention  is just to be seen of men and show  
ostentation.
CHAPTER  THREE:  ON THE INWARD  WORKS  OF RECITATION
They  are ten: the first is the understanding  of the original  meaning  of words  
(of the Qur'an);  then the exaltation  (of the Qur'an);  then the heart's  presence  (and  
attentiveness  in recitation);  then the reflection  (on the ideas and concepts  which  
implied  in the Qur'an);  then the comprehension  (of its significances);  then  
releasing  oneself  from the obstructions  of understanding;  then the giving  
particularization  (to every  Holy  Verse);  then the impression;  then the promotion;  
and then the freedom  (from  one's strength  and ability).
The first is to understand  well the great excellence  and superiority  of the 
words  (of the Qur'an),  and the favour  and bounty  of Allah Almighty,  and His 
Kindness  towards  His creatures,  as shown  from  His descent  from His Throne  of 
Majesty  to the degree  of having  His speech  understandable  to His creatures.


Page 538:
536 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
Consider  then How he has been kind to His creatures,  through  conveying  the 
meanings  of His Speech,  Which  is an Ancient  Attribute  belonging  to His Nature,  
to the minds  of His creatures,  and how this Attribute  is manifested  to them  in the 
form  of utterance  of letters  and sounds,  a characteristic  belonging  to men,  since  it 
is beyond  the reach of the minds  of the human  beings  to understand  well the 
Attributes  of Allah  Almighty  except  by way of describing  them.  Had it not been  
for the fact that the essence  of the majesty  of His Speech  is concealed  underneath  
the veil of letters,  surely,  no throne  nor earth would  have stood firm on hearing  
His Speech,  and what is between  them would have vanished  because  of His 
Magnificent  Authority  and Great  Light.
Moreover,  had Allah Almighty  not made Moses firm, he would  not have  
endured  to hear His Speech,  just like the mount  which  did not abide  by its place  
on the commencement  of the manifestation  of His Glory  upon it, whereas  it 
went  to dust.
Furthermore,  the great excellence  of Allah's Speech  could not be made  
understandable  except  by way of setting  forth parables  in propordon  with the 
capability  of the people's  minds.  Thus  one of the Gnosdcs  expresses  this idea by 
saying  that each letter  of the Speech  of Allah  Almighty  is in the Preserved  Tablet  
greater  and more  huge than the mountain  of Qaf, and if all of the angels  "Peace  
be upon them"  gather  together  round  a single  letter to move  it, they would  not 
endure  it unless  Israfil  "Peace  be upon him", the angel of the Preserved  Tablet  
would  come  and raise and move  it, by permission  and mercy  of Allah  Almighty,  
and not by his (Israfil's)  power  or capacity;  but it is Allah Almighty  Who has 
given  him such power,  therewith  He uses him.
A wise man expresses  elegantly  the significance  of Allah's  Kindness  (towards  
His Creatures)  as shown  from making  the meanings  of His Speech  constandy  
understandable  to the minds  of men,  in spite of its high rank and great  superiority  
on the one hand,  and man's  shortage  and inferiority  on the other  hand. He sets 
for a parable,  in which  he does not prove  short (of illustration):  A sage invited  
one of the kings to have faith in the law brought  about by the Prophets,  
thereupon  eh asked  him about  many  things,  and he gave him answers  which  were  
beyond  the reach of his understanding.  On that the king said to him: "Tell me 
about  what the Prophets  might  bring about:  if they pretend  it is not a human  
speech,  and it is rather  the Divine  Speech  of Allah Almighty,  how should  the 
people  have power  to carry  it?"
The sage said: "In our opinion,  when the people  wanted  to make the various  
kinds  of beasts  and birds understand  their purposes  of moving  them forward  or 
backward,  their going and returning,  and at the same time, observed  that the 
beasts  and birds  had no mental  power  to understand  their speech,  springing  from  
the lights  of their  intellects,  in spite of its elegance  and embellishment,  and pretty  
structure,  they (were forced  to) descend  to the rank at which  the beasts  could  be 
able to understand,  and conveyed  to their minds  their purposes,  through  sounds  
which they set depending  upon clicking  and whistling,  and the sounds  which  
nearly  resembled  theirs,  in order that those (beasts)  could be able to carry (the 
significances  of) them.


Page 539:
Book  eight:  The proprieties  of reciting  the qur'an
The same is true of the people,  who fail to carry the Speech  of Allah  
Almighty  in its real essence  and perfect  attributes.  But rather they came to 
understand  it only through  such of sounds  as widespread  among  themselves,  
with which  they heard  the wisdom,  just like the sounds  of clicking  and whistling  
with which  the beasts (and birds) heard from the people.  Nevertheless,  this 
does not prevent  the deep significances  and meanings  of wisdom  which  are 
concealed  in its real attribute  to have the word-sounds  (through  which  it is 
manifested)  decked  with honour  and exaltation,  resulting  from the honour  and 
exaltation  of this wisdom.  In this way, the sound-word  has come to act as a 
body  and residence  for the wisdom,  whereas  wisdom  as its breath  and spirit.  As 
well as the human  bodies  are honoured  and cherished  by virtue  of the position  
of the spirits  (which  inhabit  them),  the word-sounds  are honoured  and exalted  
by virtue  of the honour  and excellence  of the wisdom  implied  in them.
But even, the speech  (of Allah) is of high position,  lofty rank, compulsive  
authority,  effective  judgement  in truth and falsehood.  It is the fair judge  and the 
accepted  witness,  which  has the power  to enjoin  (what  is right) and forbid  (what  
is false),  and the falsehood  has no power  to stand  against  the speech  of wisdom,  
in the same  way as the shade  has no power  to stand  against  the sun rays; and th- 
human  beings  have no power  to penetrate  into the depths  of wisdom,  as well a 
their eye-sights  have no power  to endure  the burning  light of the sun, but the) 
get of the sun light what is enough  for their sights to remain  effective,  and for 
them  to be guided  to their  needs.
Thus, the speech  (of Allah) is like a king whose face is veiled (from his 
subjects),  even though  whose  commands  and orders  are in force  among  them,  or 
like the great  visible  sun of abundant  light, but whose  essence  is hidden,  or like 
the flourishing  stars by which  one who is misled  could  be guided  aright.  It is the 
key of the valuable  precious  treasures,  and the drink  of life which,  whoever  drinks  
thereof,  will never die, or like the medicine  of the ailments  which,  whoever  is 
given  some  thereof,  will never  be patient.  This,  which  the sage has mentioned,  is 
a brief explanation  of the way of making the meaning  of the speech  
understandable  (to men);  and what  is beyond  that is not fitting  for the science  of 
practical  religion,  and thus one should  be satisfied  only  with that.
The second  is to exalt the Producer  of Speech.  The reciter,  at the beginning  
of his recitation,  should  bring  in his heart  the great Magnificence  and Majesty  of 
the Producer  of Speech,  putting  in mind  that what he is reciting  does not belong  
to the human  speech,  on the one hand,  and the fact that in the recitation  of the 
Speech  of Allah  Almighty  the utmost  care should  be taken,  since Allah  Almighty  
says in this respect:  " That this is indeed  a Qur ’an most honourable,  In a Book  
well-guarded,  Which  none shall touch but those who are clean." (Al-Waqi'ah  
77:79)537
■i ^ (Qjp Oy& <4 (if f
As well as the visible  cover  and papers  of the Mushaf  are well-guarded  from  
the skin and complexion  of the toucher  unless  he is clean, so are the internal


Page 540:
538 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
meanings  of the Qur'an,  because  of its power  and glory,  veiled  from the inside  of 
the heart of the reciter unless it gets pure and clean from any kind of 
abomination,  and is enlightened  by the light of exaltation  and veneration;  and as 
well as it is not befitting  for any hand to touch  the cover  of the Mushaf,  it is also 
not befitting  for any tongue  to recite  the letters  of the Qur'an,  nor for any heart  
to attain  its meanings.
For such exaltation,  it was the habit of Ikrimah  Ibn Abu Jahl to fall 
unconscious  whenever  he spread  out the Mushaf  and say: "This  is the Speech  of 
my Lord!  This  is the Speech  of my Lord!"  to be sure, to exalt  the speech  is also to 
exalt the Producer  of the Speech;  and one could not bring about  such great  
magnificence  of the Producer  of Speech  in his heart unless he thinks  of His 
Attributes,  Acts and Majesty  and Glory.
If it occurs  to his mind the Throne  (of Authority),  the heavens  and the 
earth,  and what is lying between  them, such as men and jinns, animals  and 
plants,  and is well-aware  of the fact that the Creator,  the Sustainer,  and the 
Cherisher  One, Who has power  over all of them is One, and that all of them  
are in the grip of His Power,  wavering  between  His Bounty  and Mercy  on the 
one hand, and His Wrath and Punishment  on the other hand, that if He 
bestows  a blessing,  it is out of His Bounty  and Generosity,  and if He 
punishes,  it is by His Justice  and Fairness,  and that it is He Who says: "Let  
those be admitted  to the Garden,  and I have no care; and let those be 
admitted  to the fire (of Hell),  and I have no care",  and this is the utmost  of 
Magnificence  and Loftiness,  I say that if one thinks  of all of that, he soon  
brings  in his heart the exaltation  of the Producer  of Speech,  and then the 
exaltation  of the Speech  itself.
The third pertains  to the presence  (and attentiveness)  of the heart, and 
freeing  oneself  from any innermost  talks. In comment  on Allah's  saying:  "O 
Yahya!  take hold of the Book  with might"  (Maryam  12)
It is said that it means  with serious  effort and endeavour.  To take it with  
serious  effort  is to devote  oneself  wholeheartedly  to it on reciting  it, with his 
attention  diverted  entirely  to it from anything  else. It was said to one of those  
(learned  men): "do you talk to yourself  with anything  while you are reciting  the 
Qur'an?"  he said: "Is there anything  dearer  to me than the Holy  Qur'an  so that I 
would talk to myself  with?" it was one of the ancient  righteous  men that 
whenever  he recited  a Holy Verse  in which  his heart  was not attentively  present,  
he would  repeat  it.
However,  this state is developed  from the previous  one, i.e. the 
exaltation  (of the Speech  as well as of the Producer  of the Speech).  He who  
exalts  the speech  which  he is reciting  rejoices  of it, and feels its companionship,  
and becomes  not heedless  of it. The Holy Qur'an  has that thing  with which  the 
reciter  becomes  affable,  but if the reciter  is fitting  for it: how then should  he 
seek the companionship  with any other  thoughts  or ideas,  seeing  that (while  he


Page 541:
Book  eight:  The proprieties  of reciting  the qur'an  
is reciting  the Qur'an)  he is in an enjoyment,  which  has such of landscapes  and 
views  as by which  he is occupied  from looking  at anything  else?
It is said that the Qur'an  is full of squares,  gardens,  closets,  bridals,  preludes,  
meadows  and stores:  the (Surahs  which  begin  with the letters)  Alif Lam Mim are 
the squares  of the Qur'an;  the (Surahs  which  begin  with the letters)  Alif Lam Ra' 
are the gardens  of the Qur'an;  the (Surahs  which  begin  with the letter)  Ha are the 
closets  of the Qur'an;  the (Surahs  which  begin  with)  Tasbih  are the bridals  of the 
Qur'an;  the (Surahs  which  begin  with the letters)  Ha Mim are the heavy  brocades  
of the Qur'an;  and the (Surahs  of the) Mufassal  are the meadows  of the Qur'an;  
and the stores  are what  is beyond  that. If a reciter  enters  its squares  and picks up 
(the fruits) from its gardens,  and then visits its closets,  and watches  its bridals,  
and puts on the heavy  brocades,  and then has a tour in its meadows,  and then  
inhabits  in the mansions  of the stores,  he will be entirely  involved  in all of that,  
by which  he will be occupied  from  anything  else, with the result  that his heart  will 
not flee away from him, nor will his attention  be dispersed  (among  different  
thoughts  and various  ideas).
The fourth  is to reflect  (on the meanings  of the Qur'an);  and this state stands  
beyond  the presence  of the heart.  However,  one might  not think  of anything  else 
other  then the Qur'an.  But at the same time, he might  be satisfied  with listening  
to the (recitation  of the) Qur'an  from himself,  without  reflecting  on its meanings.  
But of a surety,  the purpose  of reading  is to reflect  (on the significances  and 
meanings  of what is read);  and it is for this reason  that the recitation  in a slow,  
measured  rhythmic  tones was set pertaining  to the Qur'an,  that's because  this 
manner  is outwardly  recitation,  through  which  one is able to inwardly  reflect  on 
the meanings  (of the Qur'an).  According  to Ali "Allah  be pleased  with him":  
"There  is no good  in a religious  service,  of which  there  is no understanding  (of its 
religious  ground),  nor is there any good in a recitation  in which there is no 
reflection  (on the meanings  of the Qur'an)."
If one could not manage  to reflect  (on the meaning  of what he is reciting)  
except  through  repetition,  let him repeat,  unless  he is (in prayer)  behind  an imam,  
for in this case, if he stops  to engage  himself  in the reflection  of (the meaning  of) 
a certain  Holy  Verse  and the imam  moves  to another  Holy  Verse,  he will become  
sinful,  like the one who engages  himself  in admiring  only one word  of the speech  
of him who talks to him, from understanding  the rest of the speech.  The same is 
true of him in case he is in the state of Tasbih  during  bowing  (or prostration),  
while he engages  his mind in the reflection  of the meaning  of a certain  Holy  
Verse  his imam  has recited  (during  the posture  of standing),  for this indeed  is out 
of the whispers  (which  occurs  to one's  mind  to divert  him from the prayer).
In this respect,  it is narrated  on the authority  of Amir Ibn Abd Qais that he 
said: "The whispered  suggestions  befall me during  the prayer."  He was asked:  
"Are those  connected  with the affairs  of this world?"  he said: "To have die lances  
strike  my body  one after the other  is much  dearer  to me than that. But my heart  
is always  engaged  in my position  in front  of my Lord Almighty  and how could  it 
be fitting for me to turn away?"  he then regarded  this thought  a whispered539


Page 542:
540 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
suggestions;  and it is so as long as it diverts  him from understanding  what he is 
reciting  in his prayer,  and of a surety,  Satan  could  not have power  over the like of 
this man except  through  causing  him to be engaged  in the serious  matters  of his 
religion  (even  though  other  than that by which  he is supposed  to be occupied),  
with which  he obstructs  him from (being  engaged  in) what is better  (i.e. to be 
well-aware  of what he is reciting  in his prayer).  When this was related  to Al- 
Hassan  he said: "If you are truthful  (in your narration)  from him, no doubt,  Allah  
has not made  that with us."
It is narrated  that once,  the Messenger  of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be 
upon  him” recited  "In the Name  of Allah,  Most  Gracious,  Most  Merciful"  twenty  
times;  and he did so for the purpose  of reflecting  on its meaning  and significance.  
It is narrated  on the authority  of Abu Dharr that he said: One night, the 
Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him” stood  with us (in 
the supererogatory  night prayer)  with only one Holy Verse  he kept reciting,  i.e. 
"If You do punish  them,  they  are Your  servants:  if You do forgive  them,  You are 
the Exalted  in power,  the Wise."  (Al-Ma'idah  118)
i © i o!3 oj}
One night,  Tamim  Ad-Dari  stood (for the night supererogatory  prayer)  only  
with the following  Holy Verse:  "What!  do those  who seek after evil ways think  
that We shall hold them equal with those  who believe  and do righteous  deeds,  
that equal  will be their life and their death?  Ill is the judgment  that they make."  
(Al-Jathiyah  21)
'c I I 1 Ol I I
■ L* e, tf1 >
<&
Sa'id Ibn Jubair  stood  one night  (for supererogatory  prayer)  with the following  
Holy Verse  which  eh kept reciting:  "And  O you in sin! get you apart this Day!"  
(Ya Sin 59)
4 25 0>*y  13 y
One of those (learned  men) said: "It happens  that I inaugurate  (the recitation  
of) a Surah,  thereupon  some  (of its meanings)  that I observe  in it stops me from  
finishing  from  it until dawn  rises."  According  to another  one: "I expect  no reward  
(for me) for a Holy Verse which  I could not understand  its meaning,  and in 
which  my heart  is not present."  It is narrated  from  Abu Sulaiman  Ad-Darani  that 
he said: "I recite  a Holy  Verse  in a slow,  measured  rhythmic  tones,  and remain  in 
the state of reflecting  on its meanings  for four or even five nights,  and had I not 
stopped  from thinking  of it, I would  not have left it to another  one."
It is narrated  from one of the early men that he remained  in the state of 
reciting  the Surah of Hud repeatedly  for six months,  during  which  he did not 
cease  to reflect  on its (meanings  and connotations).  One of the Gnostics  said: "I 
have a weekly  (reading  of the whole  Qur'an  to its) conclusion,  a monthly  (reading


Page 543:
Book  eight:  The proprieties  of reciting  the qur'an  
of it entirely  to its) conclusion,  a yearly  (reading  of it endrely  to its) conclusion,  
and a (reading  of the Holy Qur'an  from its beginning  to its) conclusion,  from  
which  I have not finished  for thirty years."  Those  differ  in length  according  to 
the degree  of his reflection  and investigation  in it. this man also said: "I placed  
myself  in the position  of the hirelings,  according  to which,  I have a daily  work,  a 
weekly  work,  a monthly  work,  and a yearly  work."
The fifth is the comprehension.  It is to try to grasp,  from each Holy Verse,  
what is relevant  to it. however,  the Holy Qur'an  includes  the Attributes  and Acts  
of Allah Almighty,  the states of the Prophets  and Messengers  "Peace  be upon  
them",  the states of those who belied them, and how they were ruined,  the 
commands  and admonitions  of Allah,  the Garden  and the fire (of Hell).
The Attributes  of Allah Almighty  are mentioned  in such Holy Verses  as His 
Almighty's  statement:  "there  is nothing  whatever  like unto Him, and He is the 
One that hears  and sees (all things)."  (Ash-Shura  11)
itjj .J l I <-41L aS"" ^
And: " Allah  is He, than Whom  there  is no other  god; the Sovereign,  the Holy  
One, the Source  of Peace  (and Perfection),  the Guardian  of Faith,  the Preserver  
of Safety,  the Exalted  in Might,  the Irresistible,  the Supreme:  Glory to Allah!  
(High  is He) above  the partners  they attribute  to Him."  (Al-Hashr  23)
j^i  (UuT  jr jiaiT  lip  i > *3j kJ\ }541
A
Let one then consider  the meanings  of those words  and attributes,  in order  
that their mysteries  might  be revealed  to him, for indeed,  underneath  them there  
lie buried  meanings  and concepts  which are not disclosed  but to those given  
success  (by Allah).
To this idea did Ali Ibn Abu Talib "Allah  be pleased  with him" referred  in his 
statement:  the Messenger  of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him” did 
not favour  me with anything  private  which  he concealed  from the people,  unless  
one of Allah's  servants  is given  a special  faculty  of comprehension  in His Book."  
So, let one be eager  to seek this faculty  of comprehension.  Ibn Mas'ud  said: "He,  
who likes to get the knowledge  of the foremost  and the last, let him seek it in the 
Holy  Qur'an.  The greatest  knowledge  which  is implied  in the Qur'an  are included  
under  Allah's  Names  and Attributes,  for most  of the people  do not comprehend  
of them but what  is within  the limits  of their understanding,  without  penetrating  
into their  depths.
His Acts are referred  to in His mentioning  the creation  of both the heavens  
and the earth, and all things created  by Allah Almighty.  Let the reciter  
understand  from them the Attribute  and Majesty  of Allah  Almighty,  since the 
act always  indicates  to its doer, in the sense that its greatness  attests His 
greatness.  So, let him witness,  in his mind,  the Doer  independent  from  the act 
itself,  for he who knows  the truth should  see it in everything  round  him, since


Page 544:
542 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
everything  comes  from  Him,  and inevitably  should  return  to Him,  and is done  
by Him, and for Him. He then is assuredly  the entirety;  and he who does not 
see Him in all that he sees does not, in fact, know Him (as he should  be 
known);  and he who knows  Him (as He should  be known)  should  come to 
perceive  that everything,  barring  Allah Almighty,  is nothing,  and that  
"Everything  should  inevitably  perish barring  His Own Countenance"  (Al- 
Qasas  88)
' i Vj
It is not that everything  (that exists)  will become  nothing  in the next state (of 
life), but it is nothing  at that time, in case one considers  His Own Self as He is , 
unless  he considers  his existence  as he is really  existent,  by Virtue  and Power  of 
Allah Almighty,  and thus, his existence,  as viewed  from the perspective  of its 
being  dependent  (upon  Him)  is constant,  whereas  it is nothing  when  it is viewed  
from the perspective  of its being  independent  from Him; and this is one of the 
principles  of the Science  of Revelation.
For this reason,  if the reciter  reads Allah's  saying:  “Do you then see? The  
(human  Seed)  that you throw  out, Is it you who create  it, or are We the Creators?  
See you the seed that you sow in the ground?  Is it you that cause  it to grow,  or 
are We the Cause?...  See you the water  which  you drink?  Do you bring  it Down  
(in rain) from  the Cloud,  or do We?...  See you the Fire which  you kindle?  Is it you 
who grow the tree which  feeds the fire, or do We grow it?" (Al-Waqi'ah  58:59,  
63:64,68:69,71:72)
bj bjui  ^ (j0) o>*1^4  JUjU ((p ^ ¥
{jj oLL1|T uilj  (JfJ y b (J3-b O' Cp
JLlUa3  \1']?■>- i lJus jI (cp Oj*'f j£- b
f' o3({J5  0yj^ <S $ el-UT  {rp (jJj 0y* bj ({p
^ (Jp 0yjy j 'ijb b- \I plio yJ | (j£-’ L
He should  not then restrict  his view  to the semen,  the seeds,  the water  and the 
fire. But rather,  let him consider  the semen  which  is a drop of similar  particles,  
and think  of its division  and turning  into flesh,  bones,  veins and nerves,  and the 
way the different  organs  and parts of the body  are formed,  from the head,  hands,  
legs, liver, heart, etc, and the noble characteristics  which appear  in that, like 
hearing,  seeing,  and thinking,  and to the blameworthy  characteristics  which  
appear  in it, such as the anger,  the lust, the arrogance,  the ignorance,  the belying,  
and disputation,  as shown  from  the statement  of Allah  Almighty:  " Does  not man  
see that it is We Who created  him from sperm?  Yet behold!  He (stands  forth)  as 
an open  disputer!"  (Ya Sin 77)
i ©»V ^  ^ ^  btJJjf >
Let man then consider  those  marvels,  in order  to promote  therefrom  to the


Page 545:
Book  eight:  The proprieties  of reciting  the qur'an  
most awe-inspiring  of all marvels,  i.e. this Attribute  from which there have  
sprung  those  marvels.  However,  through  his vision  of the (objects  of) making,  
he sees the Maker.
As far as the states  of the Prophets  and Messengers  "Peace  be upon  them"  are 
concerned,  if man learns from them how those Prophets  were belied and 
punished  and how some of them were killed (by their peoples),  he will then  
understand  Allah ’s Attribute  of Independence,  i.e. how Allah  Almighty  is free of 
want,  and is not in need for the Messengers  on the one hand,  and those  to whom  
they were sent on the other  hand,  in the sense  that if all of them  were  ruined,  this 
would  have no effect  on aught  of His Dominion.  Furthermore,  if he learns  how  
they were helped  to emerge  victorious  at the end of their journey,  he then will 
understand  Allah's  Absolute  Power  and Will to support  the truth (to prevail  over  
falsehood).
As for the states  of these  who gave lie to their  Messengers  and Prophets,  such  
as the Ad and Thamud  (peoples),  and how it had turned  against  them (as reprisal  
for their  wickedness),  let one understand  from that to entertain  the fear of Allah's  
onslaught  and wrath,  and let his pordon  of that be to take it into consideration,  in 
the sense  that if he proves  heedless,  or behaves  impolitely,  on the basis of being  
deceived  by Allah's  respite  to him, Allah's  wrath  then might  seize him, and His 
decision  is executed  upon  him.
Therefore,  if he hears (from  the Qur'an)  the description  of both the Garden  
and the fire (of Hell),  in addition  to what is implied  in the Holy Qur'an,  by no 
means  could his understanding  from that be surveyed  because  it is infinite,  and 
every  servant  understands  only  in proportion  to what he has been provided  with:  
" there is not a grain in the darkness  (or depths)  of the earth,  nor anything  fresh  
or dry (green  or withered),  but is (inscribed)  in a Record  clear (to those  who can 
read)."  (Al-An'am  59)543
i ^j.  fr- ^>
“Say: "If the ocean  were ink (wherewith  to write out) the words  of my Lord.  
Sooner  would  the ocean  be exhausted  than would  the words  of my Lord,  even if 
we added  another  ocean  like it, for its aid.""  (Al-Kahf  109)
{'T7}) '3-Iu lll>- yi 1_L 0* (jr* ^
For this reason,  Ali "Allah  be pleased  with him" said:" If I willed,  I could  
(write as much papers  as is sufficient  for the) load of seventy  camels  in the 
interpretation  of only the Opening  of the Book."
The main purpose  of what  we have mentioned  is to draw the attention  to the 
way of making  (the meanings  of Allah's  Speech)  understandable  (to the people)  in 
order  to open the gate to it. But there  is no hope to survey  the whole  entirety  of 
it. He who has not even the least degree  of understanding  in the Qur'an,  will be 
included  under those in connection  with whom  Allah Almighty  says: " And  
among  them are men who listen to you, but in the end, when  they go out from  
you, they say to those who have received  knowledge,  "What  is it he said just


Page 546:
544 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
then?"  Such are men whose  hearts  Allah has sealed,  and who follow  their own  
lusts."  (Muhammad  16)
LajIc 3^ I ijjjl \yrj»-  dJJj
^ ->■* I \y~j \j "fy-p 4$
The seal intended  here is that which  obstructs  the understanding,  as we shall  
mention  latter  in our talk about  the obstructions  of understanding.  It is said that 
the follower  of the path does not become  as such until he finds in the Qur'an  all 
that he seeks  after,  and learns  from  it how to distinguish  the incomplete  from the 
surplus,  and is independent  with the Friend  and Protector  (i.e. Allah Almighty)  
from  the servants.
The sixth is to release  oneself  from the obstructions  of understanding,  for 
indeed,  most  people  are hindered  from understanding  the meanings  of the Holy  
Qur'an  for certain  causes,  and veils Satan  let fall upon their hearts,  which  made  
the marvels  of the mysteries  of the meanings  of the Qur'an  abstruse  to them.  For 
this reason,  the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him” 
said: "Had  the devils  not been roaming  round  the hearts  of mankind,  surely,  they  
would  have  been  able to see the invisible  dominion  (of Allah  Almighty)";  and of a 
surety,  the meanings  of the Qur'an  constitute  a part of this invisible  dominion;  
and also everything  that is beyond  the limit of the five senses,  and becomes  
imperceptible  but through  the light of the sharp insight  constitute  a part of the 
invisible  dominion.
However,  the veils which  obstructs  one from  understanding  are four:
1- The first is to have one's attention  wholly diverted  to the way of 
pronunciation  and utterance  of the letters;  and this is caused  by a devil who is 
entrusted  to the reciters,  in order to divert them from understanding  the 
meanings  of the Speech  of Allah Almighty.  This devil keeps inciting  him to 
repeat  every  letter,  giving  him the false impression  that he has not pronounced  it 
as it should  be. In this way, his (the reciter's)  reflection  is reduced  only to the 
pronunciation  of the letters:  how then should  the meanings  (and mysteries)  be 
disclosed  to him? However,  he who surrenders  to this kind of confusion  
becomes  the greatest  laughingstock  of the devil.
2- The second  is to be no more than an imitative  of a certain  doctrine  or 
opinion  which  he heard by way of tradition,  in which  he becomes  strictly  rigid,  
and to which  he turns to be radically  enthusiast,  only by way of following  the 
hearsay,  and not by way of thought  and observation  to attain it. this person  is 
bounded  by his dogma  from going  beyond  it, and thus nothing  could  then occur  
to his mind other  than what he believes,  for his sight is restricted  to his hearsay.  
If a lightning  shines  afar enough  for one of the meanings  to appear,  which  is 
different  from his hearsay,  the devil of imitation  then will make assault  against  
him saying:  "How should  this meaning  occur to your mind, seeing that it is 
different  from the dogma  of your forefathers?"  this leads him to think that this 
(which  occurs  to his mind) is but a conceit  from Satan,  from which  he keeps  
himself  far and of which  he becomes  cautious.
In connection  with the like of that, the Sufis say that 'the knowledge  is a veil',


Page 547:
Book  eight:  The proprieties  of reciting  the qur'an  
meaning  with knowledge  the dogmas  in which  most people  have persisted,  by 
way of imitation,  or because  of dialectical  arguments  revised  by the doctrine-  
fanatics  and thrown  away  to them.  But how should  the real knowledge,  which  is 
the Revelation  and Contemplation  with the help of the light of the sharp  insight,  
be a veil, seeing  that it is the farthest  point  which  one might  expect  to reach  in his 
seeking?
This imitation  might be invalid and thus it is an obstruction  (from  
understanding),  just as the one thinks  of the concept  of 'Istiwa'  on the Throne  as 
being  the well-establishment;  and if it is occurs  to his mind,  for example,  that the 
Holy One is He, Who should  be deemed  far beyond  all of what is possible  for 
His creatures,  his imitation  will not enable  him to have this concept  reside  in his 
mind,  even though  had it resided  in his mind,  he would  have been drawn  to a 
second  and then a third disclosure,  and so on. But soon he hastens  to avert that 
from his mind,  on the basis of its contradiction  with his invalid  imitation.  On the 
other  hand, the imitation  might  be valid,  but at the same time, it also obstructs  
him from  understanding  and disclosure,  for the truth  which  it is incumbent  upon  
the people  to believe  in is of various  degrees  and ranks, as well as it has an 
outward  surface  and inward depth; and it is known that the disposition's  
inflexible  persistence  in the outward  surface  hinders  it from delving  into the 
inward  depth,  as we have mentioned  in the difference  between  the exoteric  and 
esoteric  sciences  in the Book  of the Principles  of the Creeds.
3- The third is that one might be persistent  in committing  a sin, ( 
importunate  in showing  arrogance  and haughtiness,  or is given to the trial of 
desire  for (the material  benefits  of) this world,  to which  he submits.  Of a surety,  
this is the direct cause of the darkness  and rust which  is accumulated  on the 
heart;  and it is like the dirt on a mirror,  which  hinders  the pure truth to appear  
clearly  in it. It is the greatest  veil of the heart,  which  prevails  over the majority  of 
the people.  The more the lusts and desires  are accumulated,  the more the 
meanings  of the words (of the Qur'an)  becomes  abstruse;  and the lighter  the 
burdens  of this world  become  in the heart,  the clearer  the meanings  of the words  
in it turn to be. The heart  is like the mirror,  the desires  and lusts are like the rust,  
and the meanings  of the words  of the Qur'an  are like the pictures  which  are 
visible  in the mirror,  and the heart-discipline  to alleviate  it of the desires  and lusts  
is like the polishing  of the mirror  in order  to become  more  transparent.
For this reason,  the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  
him” said: "If my people  show  high esteem  to both Dirham  and Dinar  (i.e. have  
great fondness  of money  on the expense  of religion),  they will then be deprived  
of the reverence  of Islam;  and if they cease to enjoin  what is good and forbid  
what is evil, they will be forbidden  the bless of the Divine  Revelation."  In 
comment  on it, Al-Fudail  says that it means  they will be forbidden  the faculty  of 
understanding  the meanings  and significances  of the Holy Qur'an. Allah  
Almighty  stipulates  the condition  of turning  to Him on understanding  and 
admonishing  when He says: “To be observed  and commemorated  by every  
devotee  turning  (to Allah)."  (Qaf  8)545


Page 548:
546 The quarter  of the acts of worship
4 O \r&  y
He Almighty  further  says: " He it is Who shows  you His Signs,  and sends  
down  Sustenance  for you from the sky: but only those  receive  admonition  who  
turn (to Allah)."  (Ghafir  13)
<0v cr* *^J Jja Jjruj  }
He also says in this respect:  "but none will grasp the Message  but men of 
understanding."  (Al-Baqarah  269)
i © J1 ^ ^
To be sure, he who gives preference  to the vanities  of this world over the 
blessings  and graces  of the hereafter  does not belong  to those endued  with the 
faculty  of understanding;  and it is for this that the mysteries  of the Holy Book  
will not be disclosed  to him.
4- the fourth  is that one might  read an exoteric  explanation  (of the Qur'an)  
and have the impression  that the words  of the Holy Qur'an  bear no meanings  
other than what has been handed  down from Ibn Abbas and Mujahid,  and 
others,  and that what is beyond  this (explanation)  is an interpretation  which  
depends  upon  thought  (and intellectual  opinion),  and he who interprets  the Holy  
Qur'an  depending  upon his independent  reasoning  and opinion  should  occupy  
his sitting  place in the fire (of Hell). This is also one of the great veils (which  
screens  understanding  from  men),  and we shall explain  in detail  the notion  of the 
interpretation  depending  upon  thought  and opinion  in the fourth  chapter  (of this • 
book),  and that in no way does it contradicts  the statement  of Ali "Allah  be 
pleased  with him": "Unless  a servant  is given,  by Allah  Almighty,  the faculty  of 
understanding  in the Qur'an";  and had the meaning  been limited  to the exoteric  
which  is handed  down,  surely,  there would  have been no difference  among  the 
people  in it.
The seventh  is the particularization.  It is to assume  that he is the intended  in 
each discourse  in the Qur'an:  if he hears a command  or a forbiddance,  he shall  
assume  that it is he what  is commanded  or forbidden,  and the same  if he hears  a 
promise  or a threat;  and if he hears  the narrations  about  the earlier  and the latter  
generations,  he shall know  that the purpose  is not the amusement  but it is to get 
him take consideration  therewith  and learn from it that for which  he is in need.  
Of a surety,  there is no story  in the Qur'an,  but that the context  (in which  it is 
related)  bears  a benefit  for the Messenger  of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be 
upon  him” and his nation,  such as Allah's  statement:  " All that We relate  to you 
of the stories  of the Messengers,  with it We make  firm your heart:  in them there  
comes  to you the Truth,  as well as an exhortation  and a message  of remembrance  
to those  who believe."  (Hud 120)
i 22 ^ J~jrf  c'Cjl ja dLIp
Let the servant  further  assume  that Allah  Almighty  makes  firm his heart  with


Page 549:
Book  eight:  The proprieties  of reciting  the qur'an  
such of narrations  as He relates  of the states of the Prophets  and Messengers,  
their patience  against  such of harm as they received  (from their peoples),  and 
their constant  firmness  in the religion,  in expectation  for the Help of Allah  
Almighty.  How should  he not assume  that, seeing  that the Qur'an  which  was 
revealed  unto the Messenger  of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him” 
was not uniquely  particular  to the Messenger  of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  
be upon him”, but it is (a source  of) healing,  guidance,  mercy  and light to all of 
the worlds?547
For this reason,  Allah  Almighty  commands  all the creatures  to appreciate  the 
blessing  of (sending)  this Book  as shown  from His saying:  "but solemnly  rehearse  
Allah's  favours  on you, and the fact that He sent down to you the Book and 
Wisdom,  for your instruction.  And fear Allah, and know that Allah is well-  
acquainted  with all things."  (Al-Baqarah  231)
jfiJiuu 4^5o»xJ lj 1*3 O—»,*'■> lj^IJ IjJA *OJl COU  1»
ioji i i jhjip  i j 4jj i i j-231 j
He further  says: "We have revealed  for you (O men!) A Book  in which  is a 
Message  for you: will you not then understand?"  (Al-Anbiya  10)
$ t ^ } } {<h\ aJ uijji oil >
"And We have sent down unto you (also) the Message;  that you may  
explain  clearly  to men what  is sent for them,  and that they may give thought."  
(An-Nahl  44)
"Thus  does Allah  set forth for men their lessons  by similitudes."  (Muhammad
3)
I Jj- til) -UiT tiJJ^
"And follow  the Best of (the courses)  revealed  to you from your Lord,  
before  the Penalty  comes  on you - of a sudden  while  you perceive  not!" (Az-  
Zumar  55)
i C|5 ^ J^j'5  ^*5 4^'^'  (t-^=»r/ti  cr? ^ cr*°“1 If*?3 *3 ^
"These  are clear evidences  to men, and a Guidance  and Mercy  to those of 
assured  Faith."  (Al-Jathiyah  20)
i lAy ^ -^3 u~ ' -Li ^
"Here  is a plain statement  to men, a guidance  and instruction  to those who  
fear Allah!"  (A1 Imran  138)
a]cx£- y. (^wLAj  ^tiiJ  (jUj l-UA
If all of the men (and also jinns)  are addressed  by His Speech,  then,  it is more  
fitting that everyone  should be included.  As long as this certain reciter isi


Page 550:
548 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
intended,  let not him be concerned  but with himself,  and not with the other  
people,  and rather  let him assume  that it is he that is intended  (and addressed).  
Allah Almighty  says: "this Qur ’an has been revealed  to me by inspiration,  that I 
may warn  you and all whom  it reaches."  (Al-An'am  19)
i o ^ IujJ> 3J k
According  to Muhammad  Ibn Ka'b Al-Qurzhi:  "Whomever  the Qur'an  has 
reached  seems  as if Allah  Almighty  has addressed  him."  Having  assumed  that,  
let the reciter  then not take the study of the Qur'an  as his main job, but 
rather,  let him recite it in the same way as a servant  reads the book of his 
master  and lord who has written  it to him in order  to consider  it, and act upon  
what  it contains.
For this reason,  one of the learned  men said: "This Qur'an  is but messages  
which  have  come  to us from  our Lord  Almighty,  with His Covenants  and Pledges  
perchance  we might  consider  them during  our prayers,  reflect  on them during  
our solitary  services,  and implement  in our acts of worship  and the ways of 
tradition  which  we follow."  Malik  Ibn Dinar  used to say: "What  has die Qur'an  
planted  in your hearts  o men of Qur'an?  No doubt,  the Qur'an  is the stream  of 
the faithful  believer,  in the same way as the torrent  is the brook  of the land."  
According  to Qatadah:  "None  sits in the company  of this Qur'an  but that he 
returns  either  with increase  or decrease."  He quoted  Allah's  saying:  " We send  
down  (stage  by stage)  in the Qur ’an that which  is a healing  and a mercy  to those  
who believe:  to the unjust  it causes  nothing  but loss after  loss."  (Al-Isra'  82)4 y~ ^3 *>333-^  ^ oJjr^3  ^
The eighth  pertains  to the impression.  It is that his heart should be 
influenced  by different  effects  and impressions,  in accordance  with the different  
Holy Verses,  in such a way as to entertain,  according  to each kind of 
understanding,  a certain  state and attendon  therewith  his heart  gets purified  such  
as sadness,  sorrow,  fear, hope,  etc. once  his knowledge  is full, the (feeling  of) fear 
prevails  over his heart in most cases,  since restriction  is almost  common  in the 
Holy Verses  of the Qur'an.  One could hardly  find a Holy verse of mercy  or 
forgiveness  but that it is connected  with many conditions,  of which even a 
Gnostic  might  fall short, such as the saying  of Allah Almighty:  "But, without  
doubt,  I am (also) He that forgives  again and again",  but He stipulates  four  
conditions  in order  to attain  such forgiveness:  "to those  who repent,  believe,  and 
do right,  who,  in fine, are ready  to receive  true guidance."  (Ta Ha 82)
He Almighty  further  says: " By (the Token  of) Time  (through  the Ages),  Verily  
Man is in loss, Except  those  who have Faith,  and do righteous  deeds,  and (join  
together)  in the mutual  teaching  of Truth,  and of Patience  and Constancy."  (Al- 
Asr)


Page 551:
Book  eight:  The proprieties  of reciting  the qur'an
J IjLr*  odAll Yj Oj £
Here also He Almighty  connects  the exclusion  from the loss with four  
conditions.  But on another  occasion,  he stipulates  only one condition  to have one 
thing  (i.e. Allah's  Mercy)  when He says: "for the Mercy  of Allah  is (always)  near  
to those  who do good."  (Al-A'raf  56)
i ({J}) S'* j* oj B>=*“ oy>:\j  L^iL^>l  ^ Yj
Verily,  doing  good  joins all (required  condidons).
This is always  the case with him who goes through  the Holy Qur'an  from  
its beginning  to its end. He, who understands  this well is fitting  for being  in 
the state of sorrow  and fear. For this reason,  it is not strange  from  Al-Hassan  
to say: "By Allah!  no servant  who is in the habit of reciting  the Holy Qur'an,  
out of true and sincere  faith in it, but that he becomes  in the state of much  
sadness  and little joy, much weeping  and little laughing,  much trouble  and 
endeavour  and little comfort  and idleness."  According  to Wuhaib  Ibn Al- 
Ward: "We have invesdgated  those narrations  and admonitions,  and behold!  
We've  found  nothing  more ready to make hearts  smoother  and bring  about  
sorrow  then the recitation  of the Qur'an,  understanding  its meanings,  and 
reflecting  on its significances."
The sign of one's  impression  by the recitation  (of the Holy Qur'an)  is to abide  
by the description  implied  in each recited  Verse:  when  it is a Holy  Verse  of threat  
and forgiveness  that is restricted  by conditions,  he shrinks  out of his fear to the 
extent  that he is about to die; and when it is a Holy Verse  of liberty,  and the 
promise  of forgiveness  (which  is not restricted  by any condition),  he rejoices  so 
much  as if he is about  to fly out of joy; and when  it is a Holy  Verse  of celebrating  
Allah  Almighty  with His Attributes,  Names  and Acts, he lowers  his head out of 
humility  and submission  to His Glory  and Majesty,  and feeling  of His Greatness  
and Magnificence;  and when  it is a Holy  Verse  in which  the unbelievers  mention  
what is not consonant  with the Majesty  of Allah  Almighty,  like their ascribing  a 
son and a consort  to Allah  Almighty,  he lowers  his voice,  and is retired  in himself  
out of shyness  of the wickedness  of their statement;  and when  it is a Holy  Verse  
which  describes  the Garden,  he is aroused  inwardly  out of longing  for it; and 
when  it is a Holy  Verse  which  describes  the fire (of Hell),  he trembles  and shivers  
out of fear of it.
(It is narrated  by Al-Bukhari,  Abu Dawud  and others  on the authority  of) 
Abdullah  Ibn Mas'ud  that the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon him" said to him: “Recite  to me the Surah  of Women. ” He said: “Should  I 
recite  it to you even though  it has been revealed  to you? ” he said: “I like to listen  
to it from  someone  else other  than me.” He said: I went  on reciting,  and when  I 
came to Allah's  Saying:  “How  then if We brought  from each People  a witness,  
and We brought  you as a witness  against  these  People ” (An-Nisa  41)549


Page 552:
550 The quarter  of the acts of worship
i (Jp o? £
£ ^
I rose up my head,  and behold!  The eyes of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon him" were overflowing  with tears. He said to him:  
"Now,  stop, this is enough!"  this is because  the contemplation  of this very state  
absorbed  his heart  entirely.
From  amongst  those who feared,  there were those  who fell unconscious  on 
the Holy Verses  of threats,  as well as those who died on hearing  such Holy  
Verses.  However,  such states  as one entertains  makes  him more than a narrator  
(of the speech).  If one, for example,  recites  (Allah's  saying):  "if I were to disobey  
my Lord,  I should  myself  fear the Penalty  of a Great  Day (to come)"  (Yunus  15)
v’,-lp (JOjDI^I  JjJ ^
And does not entertain  the feeling  of fear, he will be no more than a speech-  
narrator;  and if he recites  (Allah's  saying):  "Our  Lord!  In You do we trust,  and to 
You do we turn in repentance:  to You is (our) final Goal"  (Al-Mumtahanah  4)
<{ 0 1U\ j liif  iy  13 liJS'ji  dUp u5j >
And is not in the habit of putting  his trust in Allah Almighty,  or turning  to 
Him (in repentance),  he also will be no more than a speech-narrator;  and if he 
recites  (Allah's  saying):  "We shall certainly  bear  with patience  all the hurt you may  
cause  us. For those  who put their trust should  put their trust on Allah"  (Ibrahim
12)
4 @ J% Xa Jp &
Let him be in the state of showing  patience  or at least let him be determined  
on showing  it until he tastes  the sweetness  of recitation.
But if he does not experience  those characteristics,  nor does his heart  waver  
between  those  different  states,  he will have no portion  from his recitation  more  
than the movement  of his tongue,  accompanied  by an evident  curse against  
himself  as shown  from the statement  of Allah  Almighty:  "The curse of Allah  is 
on the wrong-doers"  (Al-A'raf  44)
^ a^l’.lajT Jp 4&T ilLl v • jl ^
And: "Grievously  odious  is it in the sight  of Allah  that you say that which  you 
do not" (As-Saff  3)
^ {“'t'jI ^ L \jijjjj (jl J_xp a ^
And: "yet they heed  not and they turn away"  (Al-Anbiya  1)
i 0 }-*$ o-hll }
And: "Therefore  shun those who turn away from Our Message  and desire  
nothing  but the life of this world"  (An-Najm  29)


Page 553:
Book  eight:  The proprieties  of reciting  the qur’an ------------------------------
And: "and those  who do not desist  are (indeed)  doing  wrong"  (Al-Hujurat  11)
In addition  to such Holy Verses,  and thus he will be included  in those in 
connection  with whom Allah Almighty  says: And there are among them  
illiterates,  who know  not the Book,  but (see therein  their own) desires,  and they  
do nothing  but conjecture"  (Al-Baqarah  78)
4Q[5 Oy&i  Vj b]3 & 1 Vj ^L>^  OjU' ^
In reference  to the mere recitation  (with no impression),  and also Allah's  
saying:  "And  how many  Signs  in the heavens  and the earth do they pass by? Yet 
they turn (their  faces)  away  from  them!"  (Yusuf  105)
4 © by°y-*  ^ }
That's  because  the Holy  Qur'an  is that which  makes  evident  those  signs in the 
heavens  and the earth; and if one passes  by them without  being  impressed,  he 
will have indeed  turned  his face away from them.  For this reason  it is said that if 
he who is not characterized  by the good manners  of the Qur'an  recites the 
Qur'an,  Allah Almighty  calls him: "What  do you have to do with My Speech,  
since you are turning  your face away from me? Keep yourself  away from My 
Speech  unless  you turn in repentance  to Me."
The example  of the disobedient  who recites  the Holy  Qur'an  repeatedly  is like 
the example  of the one who reads the book of the king many times daily, an> 
although  it has been written  to him for the purpose  of the construction  of hi 
kingdom,  he (the reader)  is engaged  in destroying  it, and limiting  himself  to the 
study  of this book,  and had he left this study  in opposition,  he might  have been  
far from being scorned  and from incurring  the wrath upon himself.  For this 
reason,  it is not strange  to hear Yusuf  Ibn Asbat  saying:  "I sometimes  intend  to 
recite  the Holy  Qur'an,  and once I remember  what  it contains,  I entertain  fear of 
(incurring  upon myself)  wrath,  thereupon  I turn to (Allah's)  Tasbih  (exaltation),  
and Istighfar  (asking  for Allah's  forgiveness), ."
He who turns  back from  acting  upon  (what  is contained  in) the Holy  Qur'an  is 
intended  by Allah's  statement:  " but they threw  it away behind  their backs,  and 
purchased  with it some  miserable  gain! And vile was the bargain  they made!"  (A1 
Imran  187)551
yrM  ^ ^ ^ j ‘1)5 aj-vi  )
For this reason,  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" said: "Keep  reading  the Holy  Qur'an  as long as your  hearts  agree  with it and 
your skins tremble  (in awe of) it, and once you feel you have dissention  from it, 
read it no more (or according  to another  version,  leave reading  it)." Allah  
Almighty  further  says: "For Believers  are those  who, when  Allah is mentioned,  
feel a tremor  in their hearts,  and when  they hear His Signs rehearsed,  find their  
faith strengthened,  and put (all) their trust  in their  Lord."  (Al-Anfal  2)E
=


Page 554:
552 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
^ jt * O^A^  \-*l\ )»
4 © <^J L^>J  fr^Li
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him" said also:  
"He who has the best and most  pleasant  voice  in (his recitation  of) the Qur'an  is 
the one that if you hear him reciting,  you come to know that he fears Allah  
Almighty."  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said:  
"There  is no Qur'an  to be heard from anyone  more  pleasant  than that which  is 
recited  by him who fears  Allah  Almighty."
The Holy Qur'an  then is intended  to produce  those different  states and 
conditions  in the heart, and lead to the acting  upon it, otherwise,  it is of no 
difficulty  to move  the tongue  with its letters.  For this reason,  one of the reciters  
said: "I read the Qur'an  in front of one of my sheikhs,  and when  I returned  to 
read it once again,  he repulsed  me and said: "You  have made  the Qur'an  (an act 
of) work  upon  me: go and recite  it in front  of Allah  Almighty,  and consider  with  
which  He commands  you, and from  which  He forbids  you."
It is with this that the companions  "Allah be pleased  with them" were  
engaged  in all of their states  and works.  When  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him" died, there  were nearly  twenty  thousand  holy  
companions,  of whom  only six were reported  to have kept the Qur'an  entirely  
by heart,  and even of those  six, there  was different  about  two; and the majority  
of the companions  were in the habit  of keeping  many  Surahs  from the Qur'an.  
Only those endued  with knowledge  among  them kept by heart (such long  
Surahs  as) Al-Baqarah  and Al-An'am.  When  one of them came to learn the 
Holy Qur'an,  he came to Allah's  statement:  "And he who does even an atom's  
weight  of good will see it; and he who does even an atom's  weight  of evil will 
see it" (Az-Zalzalah  7:8)
4 © cr*3 © J°ji !5^“ y
He said: "This is enough  for me" and then he turned  away. On that the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "Verily  the 
man turned  away  while  having  religious  understanding."
Such state as Allah Almighty  bestows  upon the heart of the faithful  believer  
following  his understanding  of a certain  Holy  Verse  is of great benefit,  whereas  
only the movement  of the tongue  with no understanding  is of no significance.  
Moreover,  the reciter  who reads  only with his tongue,  and rather  turns  back from  
acting  upon what he is reading  is intended  by Allah's  saying:  "But whosoever  
turns away from My Message,  verily for him is a life narrowed  down,  and We 
shall raise him up blind  on the Day of  Judgment."  (Ta Ha 124)
4 © 1 A op 1 ^
And (in the same Surah):  "(Allah)  will say: "Thus  did you, when Our Signs  
came  unto you, disregard  them:  so wilt you, this day, be disregarded""  (126)


Page 555:
Book  eight:  The proprieties  of reciting  the qur'an ---------------
^ ($§2) diJ'aSj  ^r-L^j'c silljl  jJJ'jS' jii ^553
I.e. you left them,  and heeded  them not, and dealt with them slighdy.  To be 
sure, he who is neglectful  of anything  is said to have forgotten  it.
To recite  the Holy Qur'an  as it should  be, the tongue,  mind and heart  should  
share  in it: the pordon  of the tongue  is to utter  the letters  correctly;  the portion  of 
the mind  is to interpret  the meanings  (of what is recited);  and the portion  of the 
heart  is to receive  admonition  and be impressed  by desisting  (from  doing  what  is 
shameful),  and hastening  to implement  the orders (of Allah Almighty).  The 
tongue  recites  (in a slow,  measured  rhythmic  tones),  the mind  interprets  (what  is 
read),  and the heart  receives  admonition.
The ninth pertains  to promotion.  It is to promote  to such a degree  as to hear  
the Speech  from Allah  Almighty,  and not from himself.  It is well-known  that the 
recitation  is of three  degrees,  the least of which  is that in which  a servant  assumes  
he is reciting  it unto Allah Almighty,  as standing  in front of Him, whereas  He 
Almighty  is looking  at him and listening  to his reading;  and with that assumption,  
he becomes  in the state of begging,  flattering,  imploring,  invoking,  supplicating  
Him. The second  is that he witness  with his heart  as if Allah  Almighty  sees him,  
talks to him with His Kindness  and has private  discourse  with Him with His 
Beneficence  and Benevolence,  and his station  should  make him in the state of 
shyness,  exaltation,  paying  attention  and understanding.  The third degree  is that 
the reader  should  see the Producer  of speech  in the speech,  and the attributes  in 
the words;  and this requires  him not to divert  his attention  to himself,  nor to his 
recitation,  nor to the relation  of beneficence  to him, as He is his Benefactor:  on 
the contrary,  let himself  be wholeheartedly  devoted  to the Producer  of Speech,  
and his though  be concentrated  on Him,  as if he is involved  in the contemplation  
of Him apart from anyone  or anything  else. That is, however,  the degree  of the 
nearest  devotees  (of Allah Almighty),  and that which  ranks second  to it is the 
degree  of those  of the Right  Hand;  and the degrees  of the heedless  are other  than  
that.
Of the highest  degree,  Ja'far  Ibn Muhammad  As-Sadiq  tells: "By Allah!  Allah  
Almighty  manifests  His Glory  to His creatures  in His Speech,  even though  they  
see not." Being  asked  about  such  a state as befell  him in prayer  and caused  him to 
fall unconscious  and then he recovered,  he said: "I kept repeating  the Holy  Verse  
upon my heart until I heard  it from its Producer,  thereupon  my body did not 
stand  firm for contemplating  His Power."  It is in such degree  that the sweetness  
and pleasure  of the private  discourse  (one has with Allah  Almighty)  becomes  very
For this reason,  one of the wise men said: "I read the Qur'an  and entertain  no 
sweetness  in it until I recited  it in the very way as if I was hearing  it from the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" as reciting  to his 
companions.  Then,  I was raised  up to a higher  station  above  it, in which  I recited  
it as if I was hearing  it from Gabriel  "Peace  be upon  him" as dictating  it to the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him". Then, Allahgreat.


Page 556:
554 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
Almighty  raised  me up to a higher  station,  in which  it seems  as if I hear it from  its 
Producer  (i.e. Allah Almighty),  thereupon  I come to entertain  a sweetness  and 
bliss in it which  I could  not endure  to leave."
Both  Uthman  and Hudhaifah  "Allah  be pleased  with them"  said: "If the hearts  
get purified,  they surely  will not get their satiety  from reading  the Qur'an."  They  
said so because  by their  purification,  the hearts  promote  to the contemplation  of 
the Producer  of Speech  in the Speech  itself. To this idea Thabit  Al-Bunani  
referred  in his statement:  "I endeavoured  to recite the Qur'an  for twenty  years,  
and have been blessed  with it for another  twenty  years."  By contemplating  the 
Producer  of Speech  apart from anyone  and anything  else, the servant  complies  
with the command  of Allah Almighty:  " Hasten  you then (at once) to Allah"  
(Adh-Dharivat  50)i
at
And: "And  make  not another  an object  of worship  with  Allah."  (Adh-Dhariyat
51)
i V3}
Therefore,  he who does not see Him in all things has, indeed,  seen  
anything  other than Him; and if a servant  diverts  his attention  to anything  
other  than Him,  will have ascribed  implicitly  partners  to Allah  (in worship)  no 
matter  hidden  it might  be, for indeed,  the pure and mere Allah ’s Oneness  
(monotheism)  is that one should  not see anyone  or anything  other  than Allah  
Almighty  in all things.
The tenth pertains  to freedom.  I meant  by it that one should  free himself  
from his might  and power,  and turning  to himself  with contentment  and self­
justification.  If he recites,  for example,  the Holy  Verses  which  appreciate  and give  
good promise  to the good righteous  people,  he should  not see himself  therein,  
but he rather  should  see therein  the true and sincere  believers  who are certain  of 
faith, and have the expectation  that Allah  Almighty  should  join him with them;  
and if he recites  the Holy Verses  which  tell about  (Allah's)  Wrath  and criticizing  
the disobedient  and neglectful,  he should  see himself  therein,  and assume  that he 
is die addressee,  in awe and fear. For this reason,  Ibn Umar  used to say (by way 
of supplication):  "O Allah! I ask for Your Forgiveness  for my injustice  and 
ungratefulness."  When  he was asked  about  that: "As for the injustice  (its reason  
might  be known):  what then is the reason  for ungratefulness?"  he recited  Allah's  
saving:  "Verily,  man is given  up to injustice  and ingratitude."  (Ibrahim  34)
<5*
It was said to Yusuf  Ibn Asbar.  "With  which  supplication  do you supplicate  
Allah  when  vou recite  the Qur'an?"  he said: "W ith which  should  I supplicate?  I 
ask for Allah's  Forgiveness  for my indulgence  seventy  times."
When  one. during  his recitation  (of the Qur'an)  sees himself  in the state of 
indulgence  and necli^ence.  this vision  ot him will be a means  ot his nearness.


Page 557:
Book  eight:  The proprieties  of reciting  the qur'an
That's  because  if one sees how far he is from being close (to the Presence  of 
Allah Almighty),  the feeling  of fear will gradually  enter into him until it drives  
him to a closer  degree  of nearness,  in contrast  to him who sees how close he is, 
even though  he is far (from  the Presence  of Allah),  whereas  he might  be deceived  
by feeling  of safety  which  draws  him to a farther  degree  of remoteness.  If one is 
in the habit  of seeing  himself  with the eye of contentment,  he will be veiled  with  
himself.  But once  he transcends  the stage  of turning  to himself  to a state  in which  
he sees none but Allah Almighty  in his recitadon,  the mystery  of the invisible  
dominion  will be disclosed  to him.555
It is narrated  that Abu Sulaiman  Ad-Darani  said: Ibn Thawban  promised  one 
of his brothers  to come  to break  his fasdng  with him, but he delayed  to come  to 
him undl the dawn rose. In the next morning,  his brother  met him and said to 
him: "You  promised  me to come to break  fasdng  with me, and you broke  your  
promise  (what  is the reason?)"  he said: "Had  it not been for my appointment  with  
you I would  not have told you about  what had detained  me from you. Anyway,  
when  I offered  the Isha' prayer  I said (to myself):  "Let me offer the Witr prayer  
before  I come  to you, for I do not feel safe that the calamity  of death  might  befall  
me." When  I was in the state of supplicadon  during  the Witr prayer,  I was raised  
up to a green  meadow,  full of various  kinds of flowers  from the Garden.  I kept  
looking  at them  until  the morning  came  upon  me."
To be sure, those  revelations  are not attained  unless  one is set free from the 
restrictions  of his own self, and from turning  to it and to its desires  and passions.  
Then,  those  revelations  are given particularity  in accordance  with the particular  
states  of the revealed  one: whereas  he recites  the Holy Verses  of hope,  and the 
state of rejoicing  prevails  over him, the picture  of the Garden  is disclosed  to him 
in such a way as if he sees it with his own eyes, and whereas  the state of fear 
prevails  over  him, the fire (of Hell) is disclosed  to him in such a way as if he sees 
the various  kinds of its torment.  That's  because  the Speech  of Allah Almighty  
includes  the easy lenient  as well as the severe  difficult,  that which  gives hope,  and 
that which  causes  fear, in accordance  with His Attributes,  which  imply  mercy,  
kindness,  as well as vengeance  and onslaught;  and in accordance  with what the 
words  and attributes  reveal,  one turns  in different  states  from one to another,  and 
in proportion  to each state, he gets ready for being  revealed  by a certain  thing  
which  is fitting  for and close  to it. that's  because  it is impossible  for the listener  to 
remain  on one state,  seeing  that what  is heard  is of different  parts,  in which  there  
is the speech  of the Pleased,  that of the Angry,  that of the Benefactor,  and that of 
the Revenger,  that of the Compeller  Exalted  in Might  and Power  Who has no 
care,  and that of a Compassionate  Merciful,  Who  neglects  naught.
CHAPTER  FOUR:
ON THE UNDERSTANDING  AND  INTERPRETATION  OF THE QUR  AN 
DEPENDING  UPON  ONE  S MIND  AND NOT BY WAY  OF TRANSMISSION
Perhaps,  you might say: "In the previous  (chapter)  you've  made seriously  
critical  the matter  of understanding  the mysteries  of the Holy  Qur'an,  and such of


Page 558:
556 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
its abstruse  meanings  as are disclosed  to the masters  of pure hearts:  how should  it 
be desirable,  since the Messenger  of AHah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" said: 'He, who interprets  the Qur'an  just depending  upon his own opinion,  
let him occupy  his sitting place in the fire (of Hell)'? furthermore,  those of 
knowledge,  with their way of explanation  of the external  meanings,  dispraised  a 
group of those who have been ascribed  to Sufism,  who proved  neglectful  in 
interpreting  some words  in the Qur'an  differently  from what has been handed  
down  in this respect  from Ibn Abbas  and the other commentators,  and rather  
went as far as to attribute  them to infidelity  and disbelief.  If this which the 
exegetes  have said is true, then,  what  is the significance  of the understanding  of 
the Holy  Qur'an  other  than to preserve  its explanation?  On the other  hand,  if it is 
not true, what is the significance  of the statement  of the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him": "He, who interprets  the Qur'an  just 
depending  upon his own opinion,  let him occupy  his sitting  place in the fire (of 
Hell)"?"
It should  be known  to you that he who claims  that the Holy Qur'an  has no 
meaning  beyond  what is shown from the apparent  explanation  (of words),  
indeed,  tells about  himself,  and of a surety,  he is true about  himself.  But he is not 
true in his judgement  of reducing  all of the people  to his limited  degree.  That's  
because  it is attested,  from the narrations  and traditions,  that the meanings  of the 
Qur'an  are open to those  endued  with understanding.  Ali "Allah  be pleased  with  
him" said: "Unless  Allah  Almighty  bestows  upon  one of His servants  a faculty  of 
understanding  in the Qur'an."  If this is nothing  beyond  the external  meaning  that 
is handed  down,  what  then  will this intended  understanding  be? the Messenger  of 
Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "No doubt,  the Holy  Qur'an  
has external  as well as internal  (meanings),  an ending  as well as a beginning."  This  
tradition  is also narrated  on the authority  of Ibn Mas'ud,  with whom  it ends up, 
and of course,  he is one of those  endued  with the knowledge  of interpretation.
What then is the significance  of the external  and internal  (meanings),  the 
ending  and the beginning?  Ali "Allah  be pleased  with him" said:” If I willed,  I 
could  (write  as much  papers  as is sufficient  for the) load of seventy  camels  in the 
interpretation  of only the Opening  of the Book."  What  is the significance  of that,  
seeing  that the explanation  of its external  meanings  is very short?  According  to 
Abu Ad-Darda':  "One will not have the faculty  of understanding  in the Qur'an  
unless  he (is able to) interpret  it in different  ways."
According  to a learned  man: "Every  Holy  Verse  (in the Qur'an)  has as many  as 
sixty thousand  (points  of) understanding,  and what  remains  beyond  that is much  
more." According  to another:  "The Qur'an has as many as seventy-seven  
thousand  and two hundred  items of knowledge,  since every  word (in it) stands  
for an independent  (kind of) knowledge."  However,  this number  is multiplied  
four times,  on the basis of the fact that each word has an external  as well as 
internal  (meaning),  an ending  as well as a beginning.  Ali "Allah  be pleased  with  
him" said:” If I willed,  I could  (write  as much  papers  as is sufficient  for the) load  
of seventy  camels  in the interpretation  of only the Opening  of the Book."  the!


Page 559:
Book  eight:  The proprieties  of reciting  the qur'an  
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" did not repeat  "In 
the Name  of Allah,  Most  Gracious,  Most  Merciful"  twenty  dmes but to consider  
its internal  meanings,  otherwise,  the explanation  of its external  meanings  is very  
clear,  and not in need of being  repeated  as such, according  to Ibn Mas'ud  "Allah  
be pleased  with him":  "He,  who likes to obtain  the knowledge  of the foremost  as 
well as the last generations,  let him consider  the Qur'an."  Of a surety,  this could  
not be attained  only  depending  upon  the explanation  of the external  meanings.
In brief, all branches  of knowledge  are implied  in Allah's Acts and 
Attributes,  and the Qur'an contains  an explanation  of Allah's Acts and 
Attributes;  and those branches  of knowledge  are infinite.  The Qur'an  implies  
only a reference  to their main points.  The stations  of going deep into their  
details  are different  in accordance  with the different  degrees  of understanding  
the Qur'an,  and the explanation  of its external  meanings  only gives reference  to 
that. Moreover,  such of theories  and intellectual  matters  as have been too 
problematic  and difficult  to understand,  in which  the people  are different,  have  
symbols  and significations  in the Holy Qur'an,  which  none but those endued  
with understanding  could perceive.  The explanation  of its apparent  meaning  
and the analysis  of its words  then are not sufficient  in this matter.  For this 
reason,  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said:  
"Engage  yourselves  in reading  the Holy Qur'an,  and seeking  after what is 
strange  in it."
(It is narrated  that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon him") said according  to Ali "Allah  be pleased  with him": "By Him, Who  
has sent me with the truth: the people  of my nation  will disperse  from the 
origin  of their religion  into seventy-two  factions,  all of which  will be straying  
and misleading,  calling  to the fire (of Hell).  When  it is time of that, abide  by the 
Book  of Allah  Almighty,  in which  there is the news of those  who were before  
you, as well as of those who will come after you, and the decisive  judgement  
between  you. Such of the tyrants  among  you as oppose  it have been broken  and 
destroyed  by Allah Almighty;  and he who seeks knowledge  in anything  else 
other than it will be misled by Allah Almighty.  It is Allah's strong rope,  
instructive  light,  and beneficial  healing.  It is a protection  for him who holds  fast 
by it, and a salvation  to such as follows  (and acts upon)  it. it never  waves  so that 
it needs  to be set right,  nor does it swerve  so that it needs  to be made  upright,  
nor do its miracles  vanish,  nor does it become  exhausted  by being  repeated  so 
much."
According  to the narration  of Hudhaifah,  when the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" told him about the differences  and 
disputes  (among  the nation)  after his death,  he said: I asked  him: "O Messenger  
of Allah!  What  do you command  me to do if I join this time?"  he said: "Learn  the 
Book  of Allah  Almighty  and act upon  what  it contains:  for indeed,  it is the way-  
out of that." I repeated  the same question  to him thrice,  and he answered  me 
thrice:  "Learn  the Book of Allah Almighty,  and act upon what it contains,  for 
salvation  lies in it." according  to Ali "Allah  be pleased  with him": "He, who557


Page 560:
558 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
understands  well the Holy Qur'an,  becomes  able to interpret  therewith  all kinds  
of knowledge."  This statement  of him reveals  that in the Qur'an  there  is reference  
to the main  points  of all kinds  of knowledge.
In his comment  on the statement  of Allah  Almighty:  " He grants  wisdom  to 
whom  He pleases;  and he to whom  wisdom  is granted  receives  indeed  a benefit  
overflowing;  but none will grasp the Message  but men of understanding"  (Al- 
Baqarah  269)
Ibn Abbas "Allah  be pleased  with both" said: "He refers to the faculty  of 
understanding  in the Qur'an."  Allah Almighty  further  says: " To Solomon  We 
inspired  the (right) understanding  of the matter:  to each (of them) We gave  
Judgment  and Knowledge"  (Al-Anbiya  79)
L*JLPj  bojlc 4=3j ?j>#
"He names  that which  both were given  'knowledge  and wisdom',  whereas  he 
gives the name of 'understanding'  in particular  to that which was unique  to 
Solomon,  to which he made sense, and makes it prior to both wisdom  and 
knowledge.
All those matters  give evidence  to the fact that in the understanding  of the 
meanings  of the Holy Qur'an,  there  is great immensity  and extensive  flexibility,  
and that such of the explanation  of its external  meanings  as has been handed  
down  is not the culminating  peak  of attainment.
But as for the statement  of the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon him": "He, who interprets  the Qur'an  just depending  upon his own  
opinion,  let him occupy  his sitting  place in the fire (of Hell)",  and his implicit  
forbiddance,  and the statement  of Abu Bakr "Allah  be pleased  with him": "In 
which  land should  I live, and under  which sky should  I shade myself  if I say 
anything  in the Holy Qur'an  only depending  upon my own opinion"  as well as 
the narrations  and traditions  that have been handed  down  which  forbid  one to 
interpret  the Holy  Qur'an  only depending  upon  his own opinion,  it is not unlikely  
that they are intended  either  to get one restrict  himself  only to the handed  down  
narrations  and heard traditions,  leaving  thereby  the attempt  to make deductions  
and constitute  independent  opinions  and ways of understanding;  or to refer to 
another  thing  which  is assuredly  false, i.e. that none should  speak  in the Holy  
Qur'an,  but depending  only upon  what  he hears;  and this is due to many  reasons:
One is that it stipulates  the condition  that such should  be heard from the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him", and ascribed  to 
him, and it is well-known  that this might  not happen  in most  cases  in the Qur'an;  
and this means  that what  is said by Ibn Abbas,  Ibn Mas'ud,  and others  should  be 
rejected,  and rather  considered  as interpretations  depending  upon  their opinions,  
on the ground  of the claim  that they did not hear it from  the Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him"; and this applies  to all of the holy  
companions  "Allah  be pleased  with them".


Page 561:
Book  eight:  The proprieties  of reciting  the qur'an 559
Another  reason is that the companions  and commentators  themselves  
differed  about  the interpretation  of some Holy Verses,  in which  they adopted  
dissimilar  opinions,  and there is no reasonable  point  of conjunction  to render  
them adaptable,  which  means  that hearing  all of them from the Messenger  of 
Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" is questionable;  and had one of 
them been heard (with certainty  from the Prophet),  surely,  the others  would  
have been easily  rejected.  This showed  then that each commentator  interpreted  
the meaning  with what appeared  to him, just depending  upon his own and 
independent  deduction,  to the extent  that they, for instance,  adopted  seven  
meanings  for the separate  letters  with which  some  Surahs  begin,  too divergent  
to be adaptable  since there is no point of conjunction  between  them. It was 
said, for example,  that "ALR" are derived  from Al-Rahman  (Allah, Most  
Gracious);  and it was also said in this respect  that "Alif ' refers  to 'Allah',  "Lam"  
refers to 'Latif (Allah,  the Knower  of the finest mysteries  of all things),  and 
"Ra" refers  to 'Rahim"  (Allah,  Most  Merciful).  Many  things  other  than that were  
said in this issue, to the extent that it is impossible  to have a point of 
conjunction  between  all of them. How then were all of those heard (from  the 
same  source)?
The third is that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" invoked  Allah  for Ibn Abbas  "Allah  be pleased  with both"  saying:  "O Allah!  
Endow  him with the faculty  of religious  understanding,  and instruct  him in the 
(knowledge  of) interpretation  (of the Holy Qur'an)."  If (the knowledge  of) 
interpretation  is acquired  and preserved  only through  hearing,  the same as the 
Divine  Revelation,  what then is the significance  of referring  to it in a particular  
invocation?
The fourth  is that Allah Almighty  says: “If they had only referred  it to the 
Messenger  or to those charged  with authority  among them, the proper  
investigators  would  have tested  it from  them  (direct)."  (An-Nisa  83)
i Gp fr* jA^ OiAJT
He thus affirms  the faculty of investigation  to those men endued  with  
knowledge;  and it is a well-known  fact that such investigation  is something  
beyond  the reach of hearing.  To be sure, ail the narrations  which we have  
transmitted  about  the faculty  of understanding  the Holy Qur'an  contradict  this 
false imagination,  since they make pointless  the stipulation  of hearing  in the 
process  of interpretation,  and rather  give possibility  to everyone  to investigate  
through  the Holy Qur'an  as much  as is within  the power  of his mind and the 
limits  of his faculty  of understanding.
As far as forbiddance  is concerned,  it refers  to two points:
The first point  is that one sometimes  might  have an opinion  of a certain  
thing, to which he inclines  by his nature  and passion,  with the result that he 
comes  to interpret  the Qur'an  in accordance  with his opinion  and desire,  and take 
proofs  in support  of his argument;  and had he not had this opinion  or passion,  
surely,  this meaning  would  not have  appeared  to him from  the Holy  Qur'an.  This


Page 562:
560 The quarter  of the acts of worship
(kind of interpretation)  might  be done with knowledge,  such as the one who  
confirms  his innovation  with some  Holy  Verses  from  the Qur'an,  even though  he 
knows  that it is not this meaning  which  is intended  by the Holy Verse,  but he 
confuses  his opponent  with it; and sometimes,  it might  be done  with ignorance,  
provided  that the meaning  (which  he derives)  is probably  implicit  in the Holy  
Verse,  and in this case,  his understanding  inclines  to the point  of view  that agrees  
with his purpose,  which  he favours  depending  upon  his own opinion  and desire,  
and thus he will have interpreted  (the Qur'an)  depending  upon  his own opinion,  
i.e. it is his opinion  which  has led him to give such interpretation,  and had it not 
been for his opinion,  this side (of meaning)  would  not have been favoured  in his 
sight.
At other times, one might have a right purpose,  for which he seeks an 
evidence  from the Qur'an,  and takes proof  in support  of his claim from that 
which  he knows  to be not so intended,  such as the one who calls for asking  for 
(Allah's)  forgiveness  at Sahar  (the last portion  of the night,  i.e. a short  time before  
dawn),  and proves  that by the statement  of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace be upon him": "Be eager to have your Suhur (night  meal  
which  is taken  a short  time before  dawn),  since  there  is blessing  in Suhur",  under  
the allegation  that what is intended  by it is to celebrate  (the Praises  of Allah  
Almighty)  at the last portion  of the night,  even though  he knows  that it is eating  
which  is intended  by it, or he who calls for striving  one's utmost  against  the 
hardened  heart,  saying  (in support  of his claim):  Allah  Almighty  says: "Go you to 
Pharaoh,  for he has indeed  transgressed  all bounds"  fTa Ha 24)
i dp jAJl J! f
Beckoning  to his heart, hinting  that it is that (heart)  which is intended  by 
Pharaoh.
This kind (of interpretation)  might be used by some preachers  for right  
purposes,  to embellish  their speech,  and exhort the listeners  (to pay their  
attentions);  and of a surety,  it is forbidden.  But sometimes,  it might  be used by 
the Batinites  (the seekers  of the internal  and hidden  meanings)  for false purposes,  
with the intention  to change  the people  and convince  them to adopt  their false  
doctrine.  In so doing,  they interpret  the Qur'an  in accordance  with their own  
opinions  and doctrines,  depending  upon matters  which  they know for certain  
that they are not so intended.
This way is one of the reasons  for which  the interpretation  (of the Qur'an)  
depending  upon  the opinion  is forbidden.  What  is intended  by opinion  here is 
that false which  agrees  with one's passions  and desires,  apart from the right  
independent  interpretation  (based  upon  one's  knowledge  with the intention  to 
attain the truth).  That's  because  the opinion  includes  the right as well as the 
false, and what agrees  with one's desires  might  also be given the name of 
opinion.
The second  point  is that one hastens  to interpret  the Holy  Qur'an  depending  
upon his understanding  of the external  phenomena  of the Arabic  language,  with


Page 563:
Book  eight:  The proprieties  of reciting  the qur'an  
no support  from the heard  traditions  and handed  down  narrations  pertaining  to 
the peculiarities  as well as the abstruseness  and substitution  of words,  in addition  
to such (rhetorical  devices  as) abridgement,  omission,  concealment,  bringing  
forward  and backward  which  the Qur ’an contains.  He who does not base his 
interpretation,  at first, upon the explanation  of the external  meanings  of words  
(with support  from the heard  narrations  and handed  down  traditions  pertaining  
to it), and rather  hastens  to deduce  the internal  meanings  just depending  upon  his 
understanding  of the external  phenomena  of the Arabic  language,  falls into much  
more  mistakes,  and comes  to belong  to those  who interpret  the Qur'an  with their  
independent  reasoning.  That's  because  hearing  and transmission  (of narrations  
and traditions)  are essential  to the explanation  of the external  meanings  (of the 
Qur'an)  at first, in order  that therewith  he should  ward off the places  in which  
one is more  likely  apt to fall into mistakes,  and after that he becomes  more  ready  
to extend  his faculty  of understanding  and deduction.
However,  the peculiarities  which  are not understandable  but through  hearing  
(such  of narrations  and traditions  as connected  with them)  are much  more  in the 
Qur'an.  Let's refer to some of them as representatives  of all which  are alike, in 
order that it should  be known  that it is impossible  to deal slightly  with the 
explanation  of the external  meanings  (of words)  at first, and that there  is no hope  
to attain the internal  (meanings)  before being well-versed  in the external  
(meanings).  He who claims to have understood  the mysteries  of the Qur'an  
without  being  well-versed  in its external  meanings  is like him, who claims  to have  
reached  the front part of the house  without  coming  upon  its door, or the one 
who claims  to have understood  the purposes  of the Turks  from their speech  even  
though  he does not comprehend  their language.  To be sure, the explanation  of 
the external  meanings  (of words) is like the learning  of language,  which is 
necessary  for understanding.
There  are several  rhetorical  devices  whose  explanation  could not be attained  
but through  hearing,  such as the concision  through  omission  and concealment  
like Allah's  statement:  " We sent the She-camel  to the Thamud  to open  their  eyes,  
but they proved  unjust  with it: We only sent the Signs by way of terror (and  
warning  from  evil)."  (Al-Isra'  59)561
It means (We sent the she-camel  to them) as a sign to open their eyes,  
thereupon  they wronged  themselves  by killing  it. however,  one whose  knowledge  
does not go beyond  the external  phenomena  of the Arabic  language  could  think,  
from the first glance,  that the she-camel  itself  was sighted  and not blind,  and will 
not know  whether  they had wronged  themselves  or others.
Consider  also Allah's  statement:  “and they had been made  to drink  into their  
hearts  of the Calf  because  of their  Faithlessness."  (Al-Baqarah  93)
i 0 'xr >
It means  that they had been made  to drink  into their hearts  the love of the


Page 564:
562 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
calf; and it goes without  saying  that the (word)  love here has been omitted  (by 
way of concision).  Allah  Almighty  further  says: " In that case We should  have  
made  you taste two times  the portion  in this life, and two times  the portion  in 
death:  and moreover  you would  have found  none to help you against  Us!"  
(Al-Isra'75)
f.'v. ‘ a ll■ I 3^ li]
Here,  he means  two times the portion  of punishment  of the living,  and two 
times the portion  of punishment  of the dead; and the (word)  punishment  has 
been omitted  from the sentence,  and both words of life and death were  
substituted  for living  and dead  in the speech,  and of a surety,  all of this is possible  
in the classical  language.
Allah Almighty  says too (on the tongue  of the brothers  of Yusuf):  "Ask  
the town  where  we have been  and the caravan  in which  we returned,  and (you  
will fmd) we are indeed  telling  the truth.'"  (Yusuf  82)
i b]3 i^j uiif -Jf\ iiL= Jf\ ii jlz.j  >
He means  Ask the inhabitants  of the town in which  we were, and the 
riders of the caravan  with which  we've returned;  and both inhabitants  and 
riders have been omitted  here by way of concealment.  Allah Almighty  also  
says (about the Doomed  Hour of Judgement):  “Heavy were its burden  
through  the heavens  and the earth."  (Al-A'raf  187)
i (©> o/y-i-lh  J oiij *>
It means  that (the knowledge  of) it was hidden  from the inhabitants  of both  
the heavens  and the earth,  and the more  a thing  is hidden,  the heavier  its burden  
becomes.  In this way, the concealment  has been substituted  for the heaviness  of 
burden  and the (word)  inhabitants  has been  omitted.
He Almighty  says: “And have you made it your livelihood  that you should  
declare  it false?"  (Al-Waqi'ah  82)
He means  that you have made the thankfulness  for your livelihood  that you 
give lie (to Allah Almighty),  but he has omitted  the word thankfulness.  Allah  
Almighty  says: "Our  Lord!  Grant  us what  You did promise  unto us through  Your  
Messengers"  (A1 Imran  194)
i £ lily 143 >
I.e. on the tongue  of Your  Messengers,  but the word  tongue  has been  omitted.  
Allah Almighty  further  says: “We have indeed  revealed  this in the Night of 
Power"  (Al-Qadr  1)
i 0 ' b! >
I.e. the Holy Qur'an,  to which  He refers  with 'this'. He says too: “until it was 
hidden  in the veil (of Night)"  (Sad 32)


Page 565:
Book  eight:  The proprieties  of reciting  the qur'an
i !s>- f563
I.e. the sun, to which  He refers  with 'it'.
Allah Almighty  also says: " But those who take for protectors  others  than  
Allah:  "We only serve  them  in order  that they may bring  us nearer  to Allah."  (Az-  
Zumar  3)
o C.
I.e. those (who take for protectors  others  than Allah)  say: 'We never  worship  
them (but to bring us much nearer  to Allah).  He further  says: “But what has 
come  to these  people  that they fail to understand  a single  fact?  Whatever  good  (O 
man) happens  to you, is from Ailah;  but whatever  evil happens  to you, is from  
your (own)  soul."  (An-Nisa  78:79)
4l)t tiblyO  I ff^p) iL ji»- (Jjyfi.aJu  (Jj-ilSL  jG-S j>
c__ ■»<
He means  that those  people  never  understand  even a single  fact, for they say 
that whatever  good  happens  to you is from  Allah,  and whatever  evil befalls  you is 
from your own soul; and had it so meant,  it would have contradicted  the 
statement  of Allah  Almighty:  " Say: "All things  are from  Ailah.""  (An-Nisa  78)Oi
However,  the Qadarites  have based their doctrine  upon their notion  of this 
holy statement.
Those  peculiarities  might  be linguistic,  such as changing  the letters  from their  
places;  and in this respect,  a mention  might  be made of the phrase:  "And the 
Mount  of Sinin"  (At-Tin  3)
i 0 o&r?  }
I.e. 'the Mount  of Sinai';  and: "Peace  and salutation  be upon such as A1 Ya 
Sin!" (As-Saffat  130)
4 CX>~?  ^ JJ ^
He refers  to Elias  or Idris (according  to the recitation  of Ibn Mas'ud).
From amongst  those rhetorical  devices,  a mention  might be made of the 
repetition  which  interrupts  the continuous  speech,  such as Allah's  statement:  
"These  who call partners  other than Allah follow  nothing  but conjecture  and 
what their own souls desire! Even though  there has already  come to them  
Guidance  from their  Lord!"  (An-Najm  23)
0 Cj 4>
Ailah says too: “The leaders  of the arrogant  party  among  his people  said to 
those who were reckoned  powerless,  those among  them who believed"  (Al- 
A'raf  75)


Page 566:
564 The quarter  of the acts of worship
I.e. those arrogant  from amongst  his (Salih's)  people,  said to those who  
believed,  from  amongst  those  whom  they regarded  as powerless.
They imply  also bringing  forward  and backward,  and it is in those that the 
mistakes  are more  likely  committed  (by the people  in their attempt  to understand  
them),  such as the statement  of Allah  Almighty:  “Had it not been for a Word  that 
went forth before  from your Lord, (their punishment)  must necessarily  have  
come;  but there  is a term appointed  (for respite)."  (Ta Ha 129)
'Jl-'j  £ijj o# tLJf  Tjij >
It means:  had it not been for the word (of Allah Almighty)  and the term  
appointed,  (their punishment)  must necessarily  have come,  and had it not been  
for that, there would  have been necessarily  a severe  trouble.  Allah Also says:  
"They  ask you as if you were  eager  in search  thereof'  (Al-A'raf  187)
A# ^ ^ ^
((J7}) IjLp (jL>- tib fcf vib^lblo
He further  says: " they have grades of dignity  with their Lord, and 
forgiveness,  and generous  sustenance:  Just as your Lord ordered  you out of 
your house  in truth,  even though  a party  among  the Believers  disliked  it." (Al- 
Anfal  4:5)
& ^6 CS  ({p JAsp  c-ip-jS j"yi Ll>- ^
^ O Q* o!3
This speech  is not continuous,  but the last portion  of it refers to Allah's  
statement  (in the beginning  of the Surah):  “They  ask you concerning  (things  
taken  as) spoils  of war. Say: "(Such)  spoils  are at the disposal  of Allah  and the 
Messenger...  Just as your Lord ordered  you out of your house  in truth"  (Al- 
Anfal  1)
Ij 4s*.j.u 0»13 *1 I3 b)l IjiLjli  I3 Ji-ij  Vl Jlij^I  ^
I.e. the spoils  of war have  come  to be yours  since  you were  driven  out of your  
house and you were satisfied,  but they were discontented.  But He Almighty  
parenthesizes  with the command  to fear Him (and war off evil).
To the same kind, the following  belongs:  "We are clear of you and of 
whatever  you worship  besides  Allah:  we have rejected  you, and there  has arisen,  
between  us and you, enmity  and hatred  forever,  unless  you believe  in Allah  and 
Him alone":  but not when  Abraham  said to his father:  "I will pray for forgiveness  
for you, though  I have  no power  (to get) aught  on your  behalf  from  Allah."  (They  
prayed):  "Our  Lord!  In You do we trust,  and to You do we turn in repentance:  to 
You is (our) final Goal."  (Al-Mumtahanah  4)
oj*> 0.5 b*-?3 bj A 3 L?


Page 567:
Book  eight:  The proprieties  of reciting  the qur'an
Jy *yj 4A)L j \y*y  is^ cUcJlJIj Oj'-L*Jl  ^SsSyj  U-Uj I Jjj liyiS*  4JJI 
«(Q sluij  lli lu\j  ukj5tiLJ£  u5j ^ ^ djuiuftjdju
There  is also the abstruse  words,  i.e. those  of multiple  meanings,  such as the 
thing,  the companion  (Qarin),  the nation  (Ummah)  and the spirit  (Ruh).
As far as the thing  is concerned,  Allah Almighty  says: " Allah sets forth the 
Parable  (of two men: one) a slave under the dominion  of another;  he has no 
power  of any sort; and (the other)  a man on whom  We have bestowed  goodly  
favours  from Ourselves.  And he spends  thereof  (freely),  privately  and publicly:  
are the two equal? (By no means ;) praise be to Allah. But most of them  
understand  not." (An-Nahl  75)
|y*? LLL>- lijj iL 4±^3jj  cj-Lfl-j  Si I^jLLa \'jZs* 4i)l <0_^v=> $
4 ?£) 0y&->  y Di tk D-*
He refers  here to the spending  from such of sustenance  as is given  by Allah to 
anyone.
Allah Almighty  further  says: " Allah sets forth (another)  Parable  of two men:  
one of them dumb,  with no power  of any sort: a wearisome  burden  is he to his 
master;  whichever  way he directs  him, he brings  no good:  is such a man equal  with  
one who commands  justice,  and is on a Straight  Way?"  (An-Nahl  76)
*)} 4-fr^-y  LLL jI 4jJy ^Js- Jj £-=> jJbj ^ 1 J O/V^i  ^
. ^^ vil))^*4"*  3^5 J y ^ vyj y-y  D-*
He refers  therewith  to enjoin  justice  and uprightness.
Allah Almighty  also says (on the tongue  of Al-Khadir  to Moses  "Peace  be 
upon him"):  "If then you would  follow  me, ask me no questions  about  anything  
until I myself  speak  to you concerning  it." (Al-Kahf  70)
He refers  by it to the attributes  of the Lord,  the knowledge  that about  which  it 
is impossible  to ask, until the Gnostic  himself  takes the initiative  to expose  them  
at the proper  time.
Allah Almighty  says too: "Were they created  of nothing,  or were they  
themselves  the creators?"  (At-Tur  35)
<«£»
He means  without  a creator,  lest one might  have the false impression  that it 
signifies  that nothing  is created  but from  a thing  (and not by the Creator).
As for the companion,  a mention  might  be made of the following  examples  
such as Allah's  statement:  "And his Companion  will say: "Here  is (his record)  
ready with me!" (The sentence  will be :) "Throw,  throw into Hell every  
contumacious  Rejecter  (of Allah)!"  (Qaf  23:24)565


Page 568:
566 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
4 j\-h-d=>  ^^=r  (4 1*4^ (^2^ ^ I4ia j4s-iA i)^j ^
I.e. the angel to whom  he is entrusted.  And also: "His Companion  will say: 
"Our  Lord!  I did not make  him transgress,  but he was (himself)  far astray""  (Qaf  
27) i.e. Satan.
<i $5
As for Ummah,  it has eight meanings:  the first stands for the group like 
Allah's  statement  (relating  of Moses):  "And when he arrived  at the watering  
(place)  in Madyan,  he found  there a group  of men watering  (their  flocks)."  (Al- 
Qasas  23)
j-LZj llJ I ^j* aIIp Ldj ^
The second  stands  for the followers  of the Prophets  and Messengers,  i.e. the 
nation,  like your saying about the followers  of Muhammad  'the nation of 
Muhammad'.  The third stands  for such of men as in whom  all kinds of good  
exist,  i.e. a model  to be followed,  such as Allah's  statement:  "Abraham  was indeed  
a model,  devoutly  obedient  to Allah,  (and) true in faith, and he joined  not gods  
with  Allah."  (An-Nahl  120)
4 @ (J* Jjj tijli oj
The fourth  stands  for religion  such as the saying  of Allah Almighty  (on the 
tongue  of the pagans):  "We found  our fathers  following  a certain  religion,  and we 
do guide  ourselves  by their footsteps."  (Az-Zukhruf  22)
4 bjj bj ijJli ^
The fifth stands  for the term appointed  (for something  to happen)  such as the 
statement  of Allah Almighty:  "If We delay the penalty  for them for a definite  
term..."  (Hud  8)
And: "But the man who had been released,  one of the two (who had been in 
prison)  and who now bethought  him after (so long) a space  of time..."  (Yusuf
44)
4 0ol juJ c^jjT  Jlij ^
The sixth stands  for the stature:  it is said: 'So and so is of good stature'.  The  
seventh  stands  for such of men as is unique  in his religion,  in which  none shares,  
such as the statement  of the Prophet  "Peace  be upon him": "Zaid Ibn Amr Ibn 
Nufail  will be raised (on the Day of Judgement)  unique  in his religion  distinct  
from others."  The eighth  stands  for the mother.  It is said: 'This is the Ummah  
(mother)  of Zaid'.
The same  is true of spirit,  which  has several  meanings  in the Holy  Qur'an,  and 
we needn't  to be lengthy  by relating  them  here.


Page 569:
Book  eight:  The proprieties  of reciting  the qur'an
The abstruseness  lies also in the prepositions,  such as the saying  of Allah  
Almighty:  "And raise therewith  the dust in clouds the while, And penetrate  
therewith  into the midst  (of the foe) en masse"  (Al-Adiyat  4:5)
The preposidon  'therewith'  in the first Holy Verse  acts as a homonymy  for 
the hoofs  of horses,  which  strike  sparks  of fire, and raise up the dust with their  
steps; and in the second  Holy Verse it acts as a homonymy  for the raid of 
horses,  which  push home  the charge  in the morning,  "Truly  man is to his lord 
ungrateful(Al-Adiyat  6)567
4 -(p * oj y
Another  example  is found  in Allah's  saying:  "make  rain to descend  thereon,  
and produce  every  kind of harvest  therewith"  (Al-A'raf  57)
{ O'fSj&'&c*  ^ '.UT  if uj>s  >
'Thereon'  in the first part refers to the clouds,  and 'therewith'  in the second  
part refers to the water. However,  there are numerous  examples  of the similar  
kind in the Holy  Qur'an.
Those  rhetorical  devices  include  also what is known  as the gradual  exposition,  
and its example  is shown  from Allah's  saying:  "Ramadan  is the (month)  in which  
was sent down  the Qur ’an, as a guide  to mankind,  also Clear  (Signs)  for guidance  
and judgment  (between  right  and wrong)."  (Al-Baqarah  185)
In this statement,  it is not known  whether  this revelation  was sent down  at 
night or by day. Then He Almighty  says on another  occasion:  "We sent it 
down  during  a blessed  night:  for We (ever)  wish to warn (against  Evil)"  (Ad-  
Dukhan  3)
4 ^ bi *4**  jU j bj >
Which  shows  that the Qur'anic  revelation  was sent down  at night (but on 
which  night  was it send down?  It is still not clear).  Then,  it was showed  clearly  
in Allah's  saying:  "Verily,  We sent this (Qur'an)  on the Night  of Power."  (Al- 
Qadr  1)
4 0 4 bj >
One might think there are seemingly  differences  among  those Holy Verses  
(even though  they are not so). That's  because  nothing  other than hearing  and 
transmission  could  avail in understanding  and explaining  those  devices  and their  
like. The Holy Qur'an,  as a whole,  from its beginning  to its end, is not void of 
such (rhetorical  devices),  for it was sent down  in the language  of the Arabs,  and 
thus it had all ways and devices  included  in their speech,  such as concision,


Page 570:
568 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
circumlocution,  omission,  concealment,  substitution,  bringing  forward  and 
backward,  and the like of that, in order  that it should  make  them  silent,  as being  
inimitable  and matchless.
Nevertheless,  he who regards  it sufficient  to understand  only the external  
aspects  of the Arabic  language,  and hastens  to interpret  the Holy Qur'an  only  
depending  upon it, with no support  from hearing  and transmission,  belongs  to 
those  who interpret  the Qur'an  with their independent  reasoning,  like him, for 
instance,  who understands  from the word 'Ummah'  only its most famous  
meaning,  to which  he inclines  by nature,  to the extent  that whenever  he hears it 
on any occasion  (in the Qur'an),  he turns  with his opinion  to understand  it with  
such famous  meaning,  and thus leave the transmitted  narrations  and heard  
traditions  pertaining  to the other meanings.  This (way of interpretation)  is 
forbidden,  apart from the understanding  of the mysteries  of meanings  as we've  
mentioned  earlier.  Once the hearing  and transmission  of those (strange  and 
abstruse)  things  are available,  the explanation  of the external  meanings  (of the 
Qur'an)  becomes  known,  even though  it is not sufficient  to understand  the 
realities  (and mysteries)  of the meanings.
The difference  between  the realities  of meanings,  and the explanation  of the 
external  meanings  of words  might  be illustrated  by the following  example:  Allah  
Almighty  says: " when you threw (a handful  of dust), it was not your act, but 
Allah's."  (Al-Anfal  17)
*-0 \! j ^ j ^
The external  meaning  of this statement  is clear,  even though  the reality  of its 
meaning  is abstruse.  It is to affirm  as well as to negate  the act of throwing,  and of 
a surety,  both are apparently  contradictory  to each other  unless  the statement  is 
understood  to mean that he threw from one point,  and did not throw  from  
another  point,  and it was the act of Allah  Almighty  in that point  in which  he did 
not throw.
Allah Almighty  says also in this respect:  "Fight  them, and Allah will punish  
them  by your  hands."  (At-Tawbah  14)
4 Cp *&j*vA*i f
How  should  Allah  Almighty  do the act of punishing  those  (unbelievers)  seeing  
that it is they (Muslims)  who do the act of fighting?  And if Allah  Almighty  is the 
doer  of punishment,  by causing  their (Muslims')  hands  to move,  what  is then the 
significance  of His Command  to them to fight those (unbelievers  and pagans)?  
The reality  of this meaning  then should  be taken from a great ocean of the 
sciences  of Revelation,  and it is not enough  to be satisfied  with the explanation  of 
the external  meanings  of words.  It is to know  the way of relation  between  both  
and the causing  power,  and understand  the way of relation  between  the acts
power  (of the human  being)  and the Power  (and Will) of Allah  Almighty,  in order  
that many  abstruse  and obscure  matters  should  be disclosed  and become  clear.


Page 571:
Book  eight:  The proprieties  of reciting  the qur'an
Allah  Almighty  has told the truth  when  He said: " when  you threw  (a handful  
of dust),  it was not your act, but Allah's."  (Al-Anfal  17) if one spends  his lifetime  
just to discover  the mysteries  of this meaning,  with its related  preceding  and 
subsequent  matters,  he will consume  it even before  going through  all of its 
related  preceding  and subsequent  matters.  There  is no single  word in the Holy  
Qur'an,  but invesdgadon  into it makes  one in need of such (time and effort  to 
discover  it), but its mysteries  are disclosed  to those endued  with knowledge  as 
much  as is the abundance  of their knowledge  and the purity  of their hearts,  and 
their readiness  to understand  and consider,  and devotion  to seek (knowledge).  
Each  of them  has a limit  of promotion  beyond  which  he could  not go to a higher  
degree.
As for obtaining  all facts and mysteries  of meanings,  there is no hope for it. 
However,  if the ocean is an ink, and the trees are pens, the mysteries  of the 
Words  of Allah Almighty  are infinite  and unlimited,  that the oceans  (and trees)  
would  be soon exhausted  before  the Words  of Allah  Almighty  would.  From  this 
point of view, the people are different  in (their faculties  and degrees  of) 
understanding  after their  equal  sharing  in the knowledge  of the explanation  of the 
external  meanings  of words.  To be sure, the explanation  of the external  meanings  
of words  could,  by no means,  avail  without  it.
In illustration  of that, take the following  example:  from the supplication  of the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" in his prostration-  
"I seek refuge  with Your Good Pleasure  from Your Displeasure,  with You:  
(providing  me with) power  and health from Your Punishment,  and I seek  
refuge  with (the mercy  of) You from (the torment  of) You: I could  not reckon  
Your  Praises:  You are just as You have praised  Yourself',  the masters  of pure  
heart might  understand  that it was said to him: " bow down  in adoration,  and 
bring  yourself  the closer  (to Allah)!"  (Al-Alaq  19) then, he found  his closeness  
(to the Presence  of Allah  Almighty)  in his prostration,  and beheld  the Attributes  
(of Allah Almighty),  which caused  him to seek refuge  with some from the 
others:  (he sought  refuge  with) Allah's  Good Pleasure  from His Displeasure,  
and both belong  to His Attributes.  Then,  he came to be much closer,  much  
more  than the first state, thereupon  he rose up (from  the attributes)  to the Self 
(of Allah),  which  made him say: "I seek refuge  with You from You."  Then,  he 
became  closer  so much  that he felt shy of seeking  refuge  (with Allah  Almighty)  
while  being  still on the carpet  of his former  closeness,  thereupon  he took refuge  
to the praise,  and praised  Allah saying:  "I could not reckon  Your Praises."  But 
he knew  that by saying  so he was short (of appreciating  him as it should  be), 
thereupon  he said: "You  are just as You have praised  Yourself."
Verily,  those  passing  thoughts  are opened  to the master  of pure hearts.  They  
have depths  beyond  that, i.e. to understand  the significance  of closeness  (to the 
Presence  of Allah),  and its relevance  to the posture  of prostration;  the meaning  of 
seeking  refuge  with a certain  attribute  (of Allah  Almighty)  from  another;  and then569


Page 572:
570 The quarter  of the acts of worship
seeking  refuge  with Him from  Him. However,  the mysteries  of that is numerous,  
and they could not be attested  only from the explanation  of the external  
meanings  of words.  In no way does the interior  of a word disagree  with its 
exterior:  on the contrary,  it is complementary  to it, therewith  one penetrates  the 
husk to reach  the bith. This is what  we might  say in order  to understand  the fact 
that the external  meanings  do not contradict  the external  meanings;  and Allah  
Almighty  knows  best.


Page 573:
In the Name  of Allah,  Most  Gracious,  Most  Merciful
Praise be to Allah, Whose  Compassion  is all-embracing,  Whose  Mercy  is 
common,  Who rewards  His servants  for their remembering  Him by mentioning  
them as shown  in His statement:  "So remember  me, so that I should  remember  
you." (Al-Baqarah  152)
And exhorts  them to invoke  Him by His Command,  as attested  from His 
statement:  "Cali on Me: I will answer  your (Prayer)."  (Ghafir  60)
i 0 Juj >
In this way, He Almighty  makes  the obedient  as well as the disobedient,  the 
near as well as the alien desirous  to offer themselves  to the Presence  of His
Glory,  by raising  their needs  and wishes  to Him, as shown  from His saying:  " I 
am indeed  close (to them):  I listen to the prayer  of every  suppliant  when  he calls  
on Me." (Al-Baqarah  186)
i «©) iij gjih  sLij ?
Allah's  blessing  and peace,  as much  as it should  be, be upon Muhammad,  the 
best of His Prophets,  and the chief  of His creatures,  as well as upon his family  
and companions,  the best of his select.
To go further:  After the recitation  of the Book of Allah Almighty  (i.e. the 
Holy  Qur'an)  there  is no religious  service  to be done  with tongue  better  than the 
celebration  of (the Praises  and Glories  of) Allah Almighty,  and raising  the needs  
through  sincere  invocations  and supplications  to Allah Almighty.  Thus, it is 
necessary  to explain  the excellence  of the celebration  (of the Praises  and Glories  
of Allah)  in short as well as in detail as shown  from the different  celebrations,  
then to explain  the excellence,  conditions  and proprieties  of invocation,  and to 
transmit  the handed  down  supplications,  which  join the purposes  of both religion  
and world, and the invocations  which are particular  to ask for (Allah's)  
forgiveness,  and seek refuge  (with Him from evil),  and the like of that. All of that 
is included  under  five chapters:
The first chapters  discusses  the excellence  and benefit  of the celebration  (of 
Allah's  Praises)  in brief  as well as in detail.
The second chapter  deals with the excellence  and proprieties  of the 
invocation,  and the excellence  of asking  for (Allah's)  forgiveness  and invoking  
Allah's  blessing  and prayer  upon  the Messenger  of Allah  "Peace  be upon  him".
The third chapter  raises some handed  down invocations  and supplications,  
which  are attributed  to their sayers,  and considers  their  occasions.
571


Page 574:
572 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
The fourth  chapter  raises  some  invocations  whose  chains  of transmission  are 
unknown,  and are selected  from  amongst  the handed  down  supplications.
The fifth chapter  raises  some handed  down  invocations  which  are connected  
with certain  events.
CHAPTER  ONE:  ON THE EXCELLENCE  AND BENEFIT  OF CELEBRATION  
(OF ALLAH)  IN BRIEF  AND DETAIL  FROM  THE QUR  AN, THE  
PROPHETIC  NARRATIONS  AND  TRADITIONS
The Proofs  From  The Qur'an  And Traditions
The proofs  that might  be quoted  from the Holy Qur'an  in the excellence  of 
celebration  in brief  are attested  by Allah's  statement:  "So remember  me, so that I 
should  remember  you." (Al-Baqarah  152)
In this issue, Thabit  Al-Bunani  said: "I know when my Lord Almighty  
remembers  me." They  were scared  from him and asked  him: "How  do you come  
to know  that?"  He said: "When  I remember  Him, He Almighty  remembers  me."  
Allah  Almighty  further  says: "celebrate  the praises  of Allah,  and do so often."  (Al- 
Ahzab  41)
He Almighty  also says: "Then  when you pour down from (Mount)  Arafat,  
celebrate  the praises  of Allah at the Sacred  Monument,  and celebrate  His 
praises  as He has directed  you, even though,  before  this, you went  astray."  (Al- 
Baqarah  198)
Jb LSoj jTj Aj>S\ oj-p aT I5 ^ J'lsiW  lili
He Almighty  says too: " So when you have accomplished  your holy rites,  
celebrate  the praises  of Allah,  as you used to celebrate  the praises  of your fathers,  
even  with far more  heart  and soul."  (Al-Baqarah  200)
i £ Hi )\ i JLii iSii >
Allah  Almighty  also says in this connecdon:  "Men  who celebrate  the praises  of 
Allah,  standing,  sitting,  and lying  down  on their  sides."  (A1 Imran  191)
He further  says: “When  you pass (congregadonal)  prayers,  celebrate  Allah's  
praises,  standing,  sitdng  down,  or lying  down  on your sides."  (An-Nisa  103)
('Tty ^ ^=> > ys>- <U)l i jj£=>  j>li JLl~ya3  I5ji
According  to Ibn Abbas  "Allah  be pleased  with both":  He means  during  night  
and day, on the sea and land, on journey  and residence,  in whichever  state of 
richness  and poverty,  health  and sickness,  in secrecy  and in public.  In criticizing  
the hypocrites,  Allah Almighty  says: "but little do they hold Allah in 
remembrance."  (An-Nisa  142)


Page 575:
Book  nine:  Celebrations  and invocations  --------------
i © "i) >
Allah  Also says: "And do you (O reader!)  bring  your Lord to remembrance  in 
your (very) soul, with humility  and in reverence,  without  loudness  in words,  in 
the mornings  and evenings;  and be not you of those who are unheedful."  (Al- 
A'raf  205)
i ^ cr^ ^3 JUiSffj o? oj^3 <-*^3  jtix) <>
Allah Almighty  says too: "and remembrance  of Allah is the greatest  (thing  in 
life) without  doubt.  And Allah  knows  the (deeds)  that you do." (Al-Ankabut  45)
4 0J) * » v^~J L «0jIj I 4jij! ^
According  to Ibn Abbas  "Allah  be pleased  with both":  This statement  has two 
points  of interpretation:  the first that Allah's  remembering  you is much greater  
than your remembering  Him; and the other is that your celebration  of (the 
Praises  of) Allah Almighty  is the greatest  worship  one might  do. In addition  to 
those mentioned  above, there are several Holy Verses (in support  of the 
excellence  of the celebration  of Allah  Almighty).
From amongst  the Prophetic  narrations  in confirmation  to this issue, a 
mention  might be made of the following:  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "He who remembers  Allah Almighty  
among  the heedless  is like a tree that stands  among  the dry stubble  (scattered  
by the wind)."  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon  
him" said: "He who remembers  Allah Almighty  among  the heedless  is like \ 
fighter who keeps steadfast  among those who flee away (from th< 
battlefield)."  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him"  
further  said: Allah Almighty  says: "I'm with My servant  as long as he 
remembers  Me, and his lips move  with (the celebration  of) My praises."
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" also said:  
"The son of Adam  does no deed,  more fitting  to save Kim from the punishment  
of Allah than the celebration  of (the Praises  of) Allah  Almighty."  They said: "O 
Messenger  of Allah!  and not even the fight in the Cause  of Allah Almighty?"  he 
said: "And not even the fight in the Cause  of Allah,  unless  you strike  with your  
sword  until it breaks,  and then you strike with it until it breaks,  and then you 
strike  with it until it breaks."  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon him" said: "He, who likes to enjoy himself  in the meadows  of the 
Garden,  let him make so much the celebration  of (the Praises of) Allah  
Almighty."  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" was 
asked  about  the best of deeds,  thereupon  he said: "It is to die while  your tongue  
is fresh  with the celebration  of (the Praises  of) Allah."
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" also said:  
"Let every  morning  and evening  come  upon  you while  your tongue  is fresh  with  
the celebration  of (the Praises  of) Allah Almighty,  so that every morning  and 
evening  will enter upon you with no sin against  you." the Messenger  of Allah573


Page 576:
574 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "Verily,  to celebrate  (the Praises  
of) Allah  Almighty  every  morning  and evening  is much  better  than to break  the 
swords  (during  fighting)  in the Cause  of Allah  Almighty,  and also to spend  the 
wealth  in charity  in abundance."  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" said too: "If My servant  remembers  Me within  himself,  I will 
remember  him in Myself;  and if he remembers  Me in the presence  of an assembly  
(of people),  I will remember  him in front of an assembly  much  better  than his; 
and if he comes  close  to me as much  as a span,  I will come  close to him as long  
as a cubit;  and if he comes  close  to me as long  as a cubit,  I will come  close  to him 
as long  as is the length  of two stretched  out arms;  and if he walks  towards  me in a 
normal  pace, I will run towards  him in a quick pace (i.e. hasten  to answer  his 
invocation."
The Messenger  of Allah "AJlah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said:  
"Seven  will be shaded  with the Shade of Allah Almighty  on the day (of 
Judgement)  when  there  will be no shade  but His..."  one of whom  is a man who  
used to celebrate  (the Praises  of) Allah  Almighty  in seclusion  so much  that his 
eyes overflowed  with tears for his fear of Allah  Almighty."  (It is narrated  on the 
authority  of) Abu Ad-Darda'  that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" said: "Should  I not tell you about  the best of your deeds,  
which  is the most  convenient  to purify  you in the Sight  of your  King,  and apt to 
raise you to the highest  degrees  (in the Garden),  and is much better  for you 
than to give gold and silver (in charity)  and also much  better  for you to meet  
your  enemy  and strike  their  necks  and they strike  your  necks  (during  the fight)?"  
they asked:  "What  is that O Messenger  of Allah?"  he said: "It is to celebrate  (the 
Praises  of) Allah so much  regularly.  Allah  Almighty  says: 'He, who is occupied  
by celebrating  (the Praises  of) Me more than by asking  Me (for his needs),  I 
shall give him the best (rewards)  which  I give to those  who ask Me.'"
There  are also many  sayings  in connection  with that issue.  Al-Fudail  said: We 
were reported  that Allah Almighty  says: "O My servant!  Remember  me for an 
hour after the morning  (prayer),  and a further  hour after Asr (prayer),  so that I 
would  suffice  you (everything  in the period)  between  them."  According  to one of 
the learned  men: Allah Almighty  says: "If I cast a glance  at the heart of any 
servant  (of Me) and find that it most frequently  persists  in the celebration  of My 
(Praises),  I then take on to dispose  of all of his affairs,  and come  to be his sitter,  
talker,  and companion  Who removes  his loneliness."  According  to Al-Hassan:  
"The celebration  (of Allah) is of two kinds: the celebration  (of the Praises  of 
Allah)  that is between  yourself  and Allah  Almighty,  and how excellent  it is, and 
how great  its reward  is; but even what  is better  than that is the remembrance  of 
Allah  at the occurrence  of what  He Almighty  has forbidden."
It is narrated  that every soul comes  out of this world in the state of thirst,  
barring  that of him who remembers  (the Praises  of) Allah  Almighty.  According  to 
Mu'adh  Ibn Jabal "Allah  be pleased  with him": "The inhabitants  of the Garden  
will not grieve  at anything  (they  did in this world)  more  than they will be at their  
loss of any moment  that passed in which they did not remember  Allah  
Almighty."  And Allah  Almighty  knows  best.


Page 577:
Book  nine:  Celebrations  and invocations  -----------------------
The Excellence  Of The Gatherings  
Of Celebration  (Of Allah  Almighty)
In this respect,  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" said: "There  is no people  who sit in a gathering  to celebrate  (the Praises  of) 
Allah  Almighty  but that the angels  surround  them,  the mercy  (of Allah  Almighty)  
covers  them,  and Allah  Almighty  remembers  them among  those  who are in His 
Presence."  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him"  
further  said: "There  is no people  who sit in a gathering  to celebrate  (the Praises  
of) Allah Almighty,  intending  by so doing  nothing  but the Countenance  of Allah  
Almighty,  but that a caller from heaven  calls them: 'Stand  up as being  forgiven  
(by Allah),  and your sins have been changed  into good  deeds  to be added  to your  
accounts.'"
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" also said:  
"No people  sit in a gathering  in which  they do not celebrate  (the Praises  of) Allah  
Almighty,  nor do they invoke  for Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon  the Messenger  
of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him",  but that this will turn to be a 
cause  of grief  for them on the Day of Judgement."  Dawud  said: "O my God! If 
You see me leaving  the gatherings  of these who celebrate  (the Praises  of Allah  
Almighty)  to those of the heedless  (who remembers  Allah naught),  then, break  
my leg before  I reach them, for this will be a blessing  You will have bestowed  
upon  me."
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "The  
good gathering  (in which  one remembers  Allah Almighty)  plots out from the 
faithful  believer  (the sins of) two thousand  thousand  evil gatherings."  According  
to Abu Hurairah  "Allah  be pleased  with him":  "The  inhabitants  of the heaven  se 
the houses  of the inhabitants  of the earth  in which  the Name  of Allah  Almighty  ii 
mentioned  in the same way as the stars are seen." According  to Sufyan  Ibn 
Uyainah:  "If a people  gather  to celebrate  (the Praises  of) Allah Almighty,  both  
Satan  and world  (with  its vanities,  pleasures  and delights)  retire,  and Satan  says to 
the world:  "Do you not see what  they are doing?"  the world  replies:  "Leave  them,  
and once they disperse,  I will lead them  to you."
It is narrated  that once Abu Hurairah  "Allah  be pleased  with him" entered  
the market  and said to the people:  "Are you there,  while the heritage  of the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" is being  
distributed  in the mosque?"  they left the market  and went  direct  to the mosque,  
but found no heritage  being  distributed.  They asked him: "O Abu Hurairah!  
We've  found no heritage  being distributed  in the mosque."  He said: "Then,  
what have you seen?"  they said: "We've  found  a people  celebrating  (the Praises  
of) Allah  Almighty  and reciting  the Qur'an."  On that Abu Hurairah  said: "This  
is then the heritage  of the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon  him"."
It is narrated  by Al-A'mash  from  Abu Salih on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  
that the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "Allah575


Page 578:
576 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
Almighty  has angels  who wander  in the land, other  than the scribes  (who record  
the deeds of) men. Once they find a people  celebrating  (the Praises  of) Allah  
Almighty,  they call each other:  'Come  to that which  you seek for!' they come  and 
surround  them until they rise up to the sky. Allah  Almighty  then says to them:  
"Which  thing  have My servant  been doing  when  you left them?"  they say: "We  
left them and they have been celebrating  Your  Praises,  Glories  and Splendors."  
Allah  "Blessed  and Exalted  be He" says: "Have  they seen Me?" the angels  answer  
in the negative,  thereupon  He says: "Then,  how  will they do if they see Me?" they  
say: "If they see You, of a surety,  they will be stronger  in their celebration  of 
Your  Praises,  Glories  and Splendors."  He then says to them: "From  which  thing  
do they seek refuge?"  they say: "From  the fire (of Hell)."  He says: "Have  they  
seen it?" they answer  in the negative,  thereupon  He says: "Then,  how will they do 
if they see it?" they say: "No doubt,  if they see it, they will be stronger  in their  
flight and escape  from it." Allah  Almighty  says: "Which  they do they ask for?"  
they say: "The Garden."  He asks them: "Have  they seen it?" they answer  in the 
negative,  thereupon  He says: "What  then shall they do if they see it?" they say: 
"Verily,  they will be more  eager  to attain  it." Allah  Almighty  says: "I then make  
you witnesses  that I've forgiven  for them."  They  say: "But so and so was among  
them,  and he came not to take part with them (in celebration)  but to ask for a 
certain  need."  On that He Almighty  says: "They  are really  the people,  whose  sitter  
(whatever  he might  be) should  not be wretched."
The Excellence  Of Affirming  Allah's  Oneness
(It is to say: "There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah."
The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "The  
best (celebration)  I and the Prophets  before  me said is: 'There  is no god (to be 
worshipped)  but Allah, the One and Only, other than Whom  there is no 
partner.'"  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him"  
further  said: "He, who says: 'There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah,  the 
One and Only,  other  than Whom  there  is no partner:  to Him be the praise,  and 
His is the dominion,  and He has power  over  all things'  one hundred  times  daily,  
(the reward  of) it is recorded  in his account  (of good deeds)  like (that of the 
emancipation  of) ten slaves,  one hundred  good  deeds  are written  in his account,  
one hundred  evil deeds are plotted  out of his account,  and it comes  to be a 
protecting  shield  against  Satan  during  this days of his until evening  comes  upon  
him, and none shall do a deed better  than him barring  he who says (the same)  
more  than that."
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" further  
said: "No one performs  ablution  perfecdy,  and then raises  his sight to the sky 
and says: 'I bear testimony  to the fact that there  is no god (to be worshipped)  
but Allah,  the One and Only,  other  than Whom  there  is no partner,  and I bear  
testimony  to the fact that Muhammad  is His servant  and Messenger',  but that 
the gates of the Garden  open to him to enter from whichever  he wills of 
them."  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" also


Page 579:
Book  nine:  Celebrations  and invocations
said: "These (Muslims  who bear witness  that) there is no god (to be 
worshipped)  but Allah experience  no loneliness  in their graves,  nor in their  
resurrecdon,  as if I'm looking  at them at the time of the sounding  (of the 
trumpet  therewith  all the beings  will rise from dead),  shaking  their heads  off 
dust and saying:  'Praise  be to Allah  Who has removed  sadness  from us: verily,  
our Lord is Oft-Forgiving,  Most ready to appreciate  (the deeds of His 
servants).'"
(It is narrated  that) the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon him" said to Abu Hurairah:  "O Abu Hurairah!  Each  good deed you do (in 
this world)  will be weighed  on the Day of Judgement,  barring  the testimony  that 
'there  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah',  for indeed,  if it is placed  in a scale  
of the balance  of him who said it sincerely  and truthfully,  and all of the seven  
heavens  and the seven  earths  and what  is between  them  are placed  (in the other  
scale),  they will be overweighed  by (the testimony  that) 'there  is no god (to be 
worshipped)  but Allah."  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon him" said: "If the sayer of 'There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah'  
comes  (on the Day of Judgement)  with sins as much  as is likely  to fill the earth,  
they will be forgiven  for him by Allah  Almighty."
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "O 
Abu Hurairah!  Dictate  to these (on the threshold  of) death the testimony  tha 
'there is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah',  for indeed  it destroys  the sin* 
entirely."  I (Abu Hurairah)  said: "O Messenger  of Allah!  this is about  the dead:  
what  then is about  the living?"  the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon  him" said: "It is much  stronger  to destroy  (their  sins and mistakes)."  the 
Messenger  of Allah "AJUah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said" "He, who  
says 'There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah"  sincerely  and faithfully  will 
enter  the Garden."
The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "All of 
you will enter the Garden  barring  he who resists  and flees away from Allah  
Almighty  just as a camel  flees away from its owners."  It was said: "O Messenger  
of Allah! Who should  resist and flee away from Allah Almighty?"  on that the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "It is the one 
who does not say 'There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah',  so, you should  
make  much  of saying:  'There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah'  before  you 
are hindered  (by death)  from saying  it, for indeed,  it is the word  of monotheism,  
it is the word of sincere  faith, it is the word of piety,  it is a good  word,  and it is 
the claim of truth, and it is the trustworthy  handhold,  and it is the price of 
(entering)  the Garden."
In comment  on the statement  of Allah Almighty:  "Is there any Reward  for 
Good  other  than Good"  (Ar-Rahman  60)
iOcr^f & & >
It was said: "The  good  in this world  stands  for the testimony  that 'There  is no 
god (to be worshipped)  but Allah',  and in the hereafter  it stands  for the Garden."577


Page 580:
578 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
This applies  also to the other  saying  of Allah  Almighty:  " To those  who do right  
is a goodly  (reward)  yea, more  (than  in measure)!"  (Yunus  26)
i (5?/ \jL^  l o )*i
It is narrated  on the authority  of Al-Bara'  that the Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "He, who says: 'There  is no god (to be 
worshipped)  but Allah,  the One and Only,  other  than Whom  there  is no partner:  
to Him be the praise,  and His is the dominion,  and He has power  over all things'  
ten times,  (the reward  he receives)  for it is like that of (emancipating)  a servant."  
It is narrated  on the authority  of Amr Ibn Shu'aib  from his father from his 
grandfather  that he said: The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon  him" said: "He, who says: 'There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah,  
the One and Only,  other  than Whom  there  is no partner:  to Him be the praise,  
and His is the dominion,  and He has power  over all things'  two hundred  times  
daily, no one before  him would  have preceded  him, nor will anyone  after him 
attain  his rank barring  he who does better  than his deed (i.e. says this statement  
more  than that)."
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "He,  
who says in one of the markets:  'There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah,  
the One and Only,  other  than Whom  there is no partner:  to Him be the praise,  
and His is the dominion,  and He has power  over all things'  Allah  writes  for him 
one thousand  thousand  good  deeds,  and plots out of him one thousand  thousand  
evil deeds,  and constructs  for him a house  in the Garden."  It is narrated  that if a 
servant  says 'There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah'  it will come  to his 
account,  and will not pass by a sin but that it will remove  it, until it finds a good  
deed  alike,  beside  which  it will sit."
It is narrated,  in an authentic  tradition,  on the authority  of Ayyub  that the 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "He, who  
says: 'There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah,  the One and Only,  other  
than Whom  there  is no partner:  to Him be the praise,  and His is the dominion,  
and He has power  over all things'  ten times (receives  a reward)  like him who  
has emancipated  four men belonging  to the descendants  of Ishmael."  It is 
further  narrated,  according  to an authentic  tradition,  on the authority  of 
Ubadah  Ibn As-Samit  that the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon  him" said: "He, who gets up (from  sleep) at night  and says: 'There  is 
no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah,  the One and Only, other than Whom  
there  is no partner:  to Him be the praise,  and His is the dominion,  and He has 
power  over all things;  glory  be to Allah;  Praise  be to Allah;  There  is no god (to 
be worshipped)  but Allah; Allah is Greater;  and there is neither  might nor 
power  but with Allah, Most High, Most Great' and then he says: 'O Allah!  
forgive  for me' his sins will be forgiven  for him, or he then invokes  Allah,  his 
invocation  will receive  answer;  and if he performs  ablution  and offers  prayer,  
his prayer  will be accepted."
The Excellence  Of Celebrating  The Glories  
And Praises  Of Allah  Almighty
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "He,


Page 581:
Book  nine:  Celebrations  and invocations  
who exalts Allah,  following  every (obligatory)  prayer  thirty-three  times,  praises  
Allah thirty-three  times, glorifies  Allah thirty-three  times, and concludes  one 
hundred  with saying:  'There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah,  the One and 
Only,  other  than Whom  there  is no partner:  to Him be the praise,  and His is the 
dominion,  and He has power  over all things',  all of his sins will be forgiven  for 
him, even though  as much as the foam of the sea." The Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" further  said: "He, who says: 'Glorified  
be Allah,  with Whose  Praises  (I exalt Him)'  one hundred  times  daily,  his sins will 
be plotted  out of him, even  though  as much  as the foam  of the sea."
It is narrated  that a man came  to The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" and said: "O Messenger  of Allah!  (the sources  of livelihood  
in) this world  have gone away from me, and I've run short of sustenance."  The 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said to him: "Then,  
where  are you from the prayer  of the angels  and the Tasbih  of the creatures,  
therewith  they are provided  with sustenance?"  he said: "What is that O 
Messenger  of Allah?"  he said: "Say: "Glory  be to Allah with Whose  Praises  (I 
exalt Him); Glory  be to Allah,  Most Great;  I ask for Allah's  Forgiveness'  one 
hundred  times in the period  between  the rise of the dawn until you offer the 
Morning  prayer,  perchance  (the sources  of livelihood  in) this world  will come  to 
you with humility  and willing  submission,  and from each word thereof,  Allah  
Almighty  creates  an angel to exalt  Allah  Almighty  to the Day of Judgement,  and 
the reward  of that will be recorded  for you."
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "If a 
servant  says 'Praise  be to Allah',  it will fill (the space)  between  the nearest  heaven  
and the earth;  and if he says 'Praise  be to Allah'  for the second  time,  it will fill (the 
space)  between  the seventh  (and the highest)  heaven  and the (seventh  and the) 
lowest  earth;  and if he says 'Praise  be to Allah'  for the third rime,  Allah  Almighty  
will say: "Ask,  and you will be given (what  you've  asked)."  It is narrated  (by Abu  
Dawud)  on the authority  of Rifa ’ah Ibn Raff  Az-Zuraqi  that he said: One day, we 
were offering  prayer  behind  the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  
be upon him”, and when  the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be 
upon him” raised his head from bowing  he said: “Allah hears such as praises  
Him. ” A man standing  behind  the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him” said after  him: “O Allah,  our Lord:  to You be the praises,  as 
much  abundant,  good  and blessed  as it could  be.” When  the Messenger  of Allah  
“Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him” (finished  from the prayer  and) turned  
away he asked:  “Who said those  words  immediately? ” the man said: “It is I O 
Messenger  of Allah!”  on that the Messenger  of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  
be upon  him” said: “No doubt,  I’ve seen over thirty  angels  hastening  to it: who  
among  them  will record  it first. ”
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said 
(according  to another  narration):  "Verily,  the good (words)  to remain  (in this 
world)  are: 'There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah;  glory be to Allah;  
praise  be to Allah;  Allah  is Greater;  and there  is neither  might  nor power  but with579


Page 582:
580 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
Allah'."  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said 
according  to the narration  of Ibn Umar:  "No man living  on this earth  says: 'There  
is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah;  Allah  is Greater;  glory  be to Allah;  praise  
be to Allah;  and there  is neither  might  nor power  but with Allah'  but that all of 
his sins will be forgiven  for him, even  though  as much  as the foam  of the sea."
It is narrated  on the authority  of An-Nu'man  Ibn Bashir  that The Messenger  
of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "Those  who exalt,  glorify  
and praise  Allah,  have their celebrations  flitter  round  the Throne  (of Authority),  
with sounds  like the sounds  of bees, in order  to make  reminder  of their sawyer:  
does anyone  of you not like to have something  in the Presence  of Allah with  
which  he is remembered?"  according  to the narration  of Abu Hurairah,  The  
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "To say: 
'Glory  be to Allah;  praise  be to Allah;  there is no god (to be worshipped)  but 
Allah;  Allah  is Greater'  is much  dearer  to me than to have anything  (in this world)  
upon  which  the sun rises."  He added  in another  version:  "and 'There  is neither  
might  nor power  but with Allah ’: It is better than this world and all that it 
contains."
According  to the narration  of Samurah  Ibn Jundub,  The Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "The  best speech  (one might  say) 
in the Sight  of Allah  Almighty  is: 'Glory  be to Allah;  praise  be to Allah;  there is 
no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah;  Allah  is Greater'  and it is of no harm  to you 
to begin  with any of them."  It is narrated  (by Muslim  and others)  on the authority  
of Abu Malik  Al-Ash ’ari: The Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be 
upon  him” said: “The purification  (i.e. the performance  of ablution)  constitutes  
half  the faith, (the phrase)  “Praise  be to Allah ” fills the scale of one’s balance,  (the 
phrases)  “Glory  be to Allah ” and “Praise  be to Allah ” fill what  is between  the sky 
and the earth,  the prayer  is a light (which  guides  one to goodness  and favour,  and 
prevents  him from  doing  evil),  the charity  is an evidence  (of one’s good faith),  the 
patience  is a luminosity  and The Holy  Qur'an  is a proof,  whither  for you (in case  
you kept reciting  it and acting  upon its principles)  or against  you (in case you 
abandoned  it and ignored  its principles).  Everyone  of the people  goes in the 
morning  (and seeks for deeds),  and sells himself  in such a way as either to 
emancipate  it (from  torture  if he sold it to Allah),  or to destroy  it (if he sold it to 
Satan). ”
It is narrated  (by Al-Bukhari)  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah:  The  
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "There  are 
two statements,  and although  they are light and easy upon  the tongue  (to say),  
they are so much heavy  in the scale of one's balance,  and so much dear to 
(Allah)  Most Gracious.  Those  are: "Glory  be to Allah with Whose  Praise  (I 
exalt Him);  Glory  be to Allah,  Most Great'."  According  to another  narration  
on the authority  of Abu Dharr:  I said to The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him":  "Which  among  the speech  is the dearest  to 
Allah Almighty?"  he said: "That  which Allah Almighty  has chosen  for His 
angels:  'Glory  be to Allah  with Whose  Praise  (I exalt Him);  Glory  be to Allah  
Most  Great'."


Page 583:
Book  nine:  Celebrations  and invocations
It is narrated  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that he said: The Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "Verily,  Allah  Almighty  has 
chosen  from among  the speech:  'Glory  be to Allah;  praise  be to Allah;  there  is no 
god (to be worshipped)  but Allah;  and Allah is Greater':  If a servant  says 'Glory  
be to Allah'  twenty  good  deeds  will be written  for him, and twenty  evil deeds  will 
be plotted  out of him; and if he says 'Allah  is Greater'  the like of that will happen  
to him..."  and the same applies  to the remaining  phrases.  It is narrated  on the 
authority  of Jabir "Allah  be pleased  with him" that he said: The Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "If a servant  says 'Glory  be 
to Allah  with Whose  Praise  (1 exalt Him)'  a date-palm  tree will be planted  for him 
in the Garden."
It is narrated  (by Muslim)  on the authority  of Abu Dharr  “Allah be pleased  
with him” that he said: The poor among  the Companions  of The Prophet  
“Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him” said to him: “O Messenger  of Allah!  
The wealthy  ones have taken away the reward.  They offer prayer  as we do, 
observe  fasts as we do, and give in charity  out of their surplus  wealth. ” He (The  
Prophet)  said: “Has Allah not prescribed  for you (a course)  by following  which  
you can give in charity?  In every  Tasbih  (Subhanallah)  there is a charity,  every  
Takbir  (Allahu  Akbar)  is a charity,  every  Tahmid  (Al-hamdu  lillah) is a charity,  
and every  Tahlil  (La ilaha illallah)  is a charity,  and enjoining  good  is a charity,  and 
forbidding  evil is a charity,  and in man's  sexual  Intercourse  (with his wife) there  is 
a charity. ” They  (the Companions)  said: “O Messenger  of Allah!  is there  a reward  
for anyone  among  us who satisfies  his sexual  desire (with his wife)?”  He said:  
“Tell me if he directs  it to what  is prohibited,  would  it not be regarded  as a sin 
committed  by him?" they answered  in the affirmative,  thereupon  he said:  
"Similarly,  if he directs  it to what  is lawful,  he would  receive  a reward  (for it).”
It is narrated  (by lbn Majah)  on the authority  of Abu Dharr  that he said: I 
said to the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him”: “O 
Messenger  of Allah! Those  of great wealth  and riches have received  (the 
greatest  portion  of) the reward:  they (do and) say as we (do and) say, but they  
spend (out of their property)  and we do not (have that out of which  we 
would)  spend. ” He said to me: “Should  I not tell you of a thing,  that if you do 
it, you will catch up those who surpassed  you, and none would  be able to 
excel you? It is to exalt Allah following  every (obligatory)  prayer  thirty-three  
times,,  praise  Allah  thirty-three  times,  and glorify  Allah  thirty-four  times. ” It is 
narrated  on the authority  of Busrah  (daughter  of Safwan)  that the Messenger  
of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him” said: "Stick  (O women)  to 
Tasbih,  Tahlil (affirming  Allah's  Oneness)  and Takbir  (as much as you can)  
and do not be heedless,  and count  your  Tasbihs  with the help of your fingers,  
for they will be asked  to bear  witness  (to you on the Day of Judgement)."
According  to lbn Umar:  I see the Messenger  of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and 
peace  be upon him” counting  his Tasbihs  with his fingers.  It is narrated  that 
the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him” according  
to the testimony  of both Abu Hurairah  and Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:  "If a servant581


Page 584:
582 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
says: 'There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah;  and Allah is Greater'  
Allah  Almighty  then says: 'My servant  has told the truth:  there  is no god (to be 
worshipped)  but I; and I'm Greater';  and if a servant  says: 'There  is no god (to 
be worshipped)  but Allah,  the One and Only, other than Whom  there is no 
partner'  Allah Almighty  says: 'My servant  has told the truth: there is no god 
(to be worshipped)  but I, the One and Only,  and there  is no partner  with Me';  
and if a servant  says: 'There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah,  and there  
is neither  might  nor power  but with Allah'  Allah Almighty  says: 'My servant  
has told the truth: there  is neither  might  nor power  but with Me'. Therefore,  
he who says those  (statements)  at death,  the fire will touch  him naught."
It is narrated  on the authority  of Mus'ab  Ibn Sa'd from his father  from the 
Messenger  of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him” that he said: "Does  
anyone  of you fail to earn a daily reward  of one thousand  good deeds?"  they  
asked:  "Who  does this occur O Messenger  of Allah?"  the Messenger  of Allah  
“Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him” said: "It is to exalt  Allah  Almighty  one 
hundred  times,  perchance  one thousand  good deeds  are written  for him, and one 
thousand  evil deeds are plotted  out of him." It is narrated  (by Al-Bukhari  and 
others)  on the authority  of Abu Musa that the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s 
blessing  and peace  be upon him" said to him: "O Abdullah  Ibn Qais (or O Abu  
Musa)!  Should  I not guide you to one of the treasures  of the Garden?"  he 
answered  in the affirmative,  thereupon  he said to him: "Say: 'There  is neither  
might  nor power  but with Allah'."  according  to another  version  he said to him:  
"Should  I not teach  you a word  from  a treasure  which  lies underneath  the Throne  
(of Majesty)?  It is 'There  is neither  might  nor power  but with Allah'."
It is narrated  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that the Messenger  of Allah  
“Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him” said: "Should  I not guide  you to a deed  
from one of the treasures  of the Garden,  which  lies underneath  the Throne  (of 
Majesty)?  It is to say 'There  is neither  might  nor power  but with Allah'.  Allah  
Almighty  says: 'My servant  has bowed  to Me in Islam,  and submitted  his will to 
Mine'."  the Messenger  of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him” said:  
"He, who says once morning  comes  upon  him: 'I've accepted  Allah as my Lord,  
Islam as my religion,  the Holy Qur'an  as my leading  guide and Muhammad  
"Peace  be upon him" as my Prophet  and Messenger'  it is incumbent  upon  Allah  
Almighty  to please  him on the Day of Judgement."  And according  to another  
version:  "He,  who says that,  Allah  Almighty  becomes  well-pleased  with him."
According  to Mujahid:  "If a man comes  out of his out and says: 'In the Name  
of Allah'  the angel (to whom  he is entrusted)  says: 'You have  been guided  aright';  
and if he says: 'I've put my trust in Allah  Almighty'  the angel  says: 'You've  been  
sufficed  (against  any kind of evil)'; and if he says: 'There  is neither  might  nor 
power  but with Allah' the angel says: 'You've  been protected  (from Satans)'.  
Then,  the devils  disperse  and leave him saying:  'What  do you want from a man  
who has been guided  aright,  sufficed  (against  all kinds of evil) and protected  
(from  Satans)?  You have no way to seduce  him'."
You might say: "What  is the reason  which lies behind  the fact that the


Page 585:
Book  nine:  Celebrations  and invocations 583
celebration  of (the Praises  of) Allah Almighty,  even though  it is light upon the 
tongue  to say, and easy upon  the body  to endure,  is the best and the most  fruitful  
from amongst  all acts of worship,  which  are difficult  and troublesome  (and thus  
more  fitting  to be higher  in reward)?"
It should  be known  to you that it is not fitting  to discuss  that but in the 
science  of Revelation.  But, as much  as is possible  to mention  within  the limits  of 
the science  of practical  religion,  let's say that what  is beneficial  and fruitful  is the 
regular  celebration  (of Allah  Almighty)  in which  the heart  is fully present;  and to 
celebrate  (the Praises  of Allah Almighty)  with one's tongue,  while the heart is 
absent  is of no avail;  and the different  narrations  and traditions  affirm  this fact. It 
is also of no avail to have one's heart  present  only for a moment  with the help of 
the celebration  (of Allah),  and then it is diverted  from  Allah  Almighty  when  one 
is occupied  by the vanities  of this world.  On the contrary,  it is to have one's  heart  
present  almost  all the time which has superiority  to all acts of worship,  and 
moreover,  it is through  it that all acts of worship  is given  honour,  since it is the 
ultimate  fruit of the practical  worship.
On the other  hand,  the celebration  (of the Praises  of Allah)  has a beginning  
and an ending.  Its beginning  enjoins  both companionship  and love for Allah  
Almighty,  whereas  its ending  results  in both  joviality  (with)  and adoration  (for the 
Object  of celebration);  and of a surety,  it is such companions  and love which  are 
required.  The follower  of the path in the beginning  might  force himself  to divert  
his tongue  and heart from all kinds of whispers  and evil suggestions  (cast intc 
him by Satan)  to the celebration  of (the Praises  of) Allah  Almighty;  and if he k 
helped  to do so regularly,  he then will come  to like to be in its company,  and the 
love of the celebrated  One will be planted  in his heart. One should  not be 
amazed  by that. It is the habit  to talk about  an absent  and unseen  one in front  of 
a certain  man, and make a mention  of his good characteristics  and merits  so 
many  times,  until he comes  to love him. It is well-known  that one might  adore  
another  (whom he has not seen earlier) only from describing  him , and 
mentioning  of his good  merits  so much  repeatedly.
If a man adores  the celebrated  one only from forcing  himself  to remember  
him so much  in the beginning,  he then  will turn to be forced  to remember  him so 
much that he could not keep patient  of leaving  it even for a short time. To be 
he who loves a thing  remembers  it so much,  and he who forces  himself  to sure,
remember  a thing so much comes to love it at last. Thus, the remembrance  
begins  by force,  until  it gradually  has its fruit of the feeling  of company  with and 
love for the remembered  thing,  which  deprives  man of the ability  to keep patient  
leaving  it in the end. In this way, that which  enjoins  the remembrance  of 
Allah)  turns to be the same which  enjoins  (the love for Him),  and the fruit (of 
remembrance)  turns  to be fruitful  (of companionship).
This is, however,  the significance  of the statement  of one of those  (Gnostics):  
"I've toiled  myself  while proceeding  through  the Holy Qur ’an for twenty  years,  
and then I've been blessed  in it for further  twenty  years."  To be sure, in no way  
could  blessing  be produced  but from  the affability  with and love for that in whichon


Page 586:
584 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
one should  be blessed,  and in no way could  such affability  be produced  unless  
one continues  to proceed  through  it, and force  himself  to be accustomed  to it for 
a long time until what is done by such compulsion  turns to be done by nature  
and disposition.
How  should  this be improbable  since  one might  have any kind of food  which  
he regards  as bitter  in taste at first, and while toiling  himself  to eat it regularly,  it 
turns to be agreeable  to his disposition  to the extent  that he could  not endure  to 
leave it? that's because  the soul is always  accustomed  to endure  that which  it 
forces  itself  to do at first. (According  to a poetic  verse):  "Verily,  it is the (nature  
of the) soul to be accustomed  to that to which  you habituate  it." This means  that 
what  is done  by force  from  the part of the soul at first turns to be done  by nature  
at last.
Furthermore,  if one becomes  affable  to the celebration  of (the Praises  of) 
Allah  Almighty,  he will turn to cease  to remember  anything  else other  than Allah  
Almighty.  That's  because  anything  else other than Allah  Almighty  departs  from  
him at death,  and no property,  nor family,  nor offspring  nor office  and nothing  
barring  the celebration  of Allah  Almighty  remains  with him in the grave.  If one 
becomes  affable  to it, he will enjoy of its pleasure,  and will be happy  with  
breaking  off the relations  with any obstructions  that might  divert  him from it, 
since the necessities  of life in this world  keeps  one off the celebration  of Allah  
Almighty,  whereas  no obstruction  remains  after death.  Thus,  death  seems  as if it 
draws  him alone  with his beloved,  which  makes  him more pleased,  after he will 
have set himself  free from the prison (of this world)  in which he has been  
hindered  from  that to which  he should  be affable.
For this reason,  the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  
him” said: "The Holy Spirit (i.e. Gabriel)  inspired  to me that 'you might  love  
whomever  you like to love, for you are going  to leave  it'." he refers  here to what  
is connected  with this world,  which  is to perish  in relation  to him by death:  " All 
that is on earth  will perish:  But will abide  (forever)  the Face of your Lord,  Full of 
Majesty,  Bounty  and Honour."  (Ar-Rahman  25:26)
i 13
The world  then perishes  in relation  to him by death,  (and so on in relation  to 
everyone)  until  it perishes  by itself  when  the decree  (of Allah  Almighty)  comes  to 
its term appointed.
Of a surety,  the servant  continues  to feel the good pleasure  of this affability  
after his death  until he comes  to live in the Presence  of Allah  Almighty  (on the 
Day of Judgement).  He promotes  from the state of remembrance  up to the 
meeting  (with Allah  Almighty),  after all which  the graves  contains  will have been  
scattered  abroad,  and all which  are locked  up in the breasts  (of men) will have  
been  made  manifest.  Thus  the survival  of the celebration  (of the Praises  of) Allah  
after his death  should  not be rejected  on the ground  of the Almighty  with
allegation  that one then becomes  nothing:  how then should  the celebration  of 
Allah  Almighty  remain  with him while  he is in such state of nonexistence?  That'sone


Page 587:
Book  nine:  Celebrations  and invocations  
because  such (dead)  becomes  nothing  in such a way as to prevent  the celebration  
of Allah  Almighty  to remain  with him: he just becomes  nonexistent  from this life, 
as well as from the world of the visible  world  and not from the world of the 
unseen  dominion.
In reference  to what we've mentioned,  the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s 
blessing  and peace  be upon  him” said: "The  grave  is either  one of the ditches  of 
the fire (of Hell) or one of the meadows  of the Garden."  the Messenger  of Allah  
“Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him” further  said: "The  spirits  of the martyrs  
live inside  green birds."  the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be 
upon him” also said to those from the pagans  who were killed in the holy battle  
of Badr: "O so and so! O so and so! (the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  
and peace  be upon him” called them by their names)  have you found  true the 
Promise  of your Lord?  Indeed,  I've found  true the Promise  of my Lord."  When  
Umar  "Allah  be pleased  with him" heard  the statement  of the Prophet  he said to 
him: "O Messenger  of Allah!  how do they hear and how do they answer  seeing  
that they have become  to be no more  than dead bodies?"  the Messenger  of Allah  
“Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him” said: "By Him in Whose  Hand  is my 
life! You do not hear my speech  better  than they, but they have no power  to 
answer."  This  Prophetic  tradition  is narrated  in (Al-Bukhari's)  Sahih.
This is his talk about  the pagans.  As to his talk about  the faithful  believers  and 
martyrs,  the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him” said:  
"The spirits of the martyrs  live inside  green birds underneath  the Throne  (of 
Majesty)."  By no means  do this state and what is referred  to by different  words  
stand against  the survival  of the celebration  of Allah.  Allah says: "Think  not of 
those who are slain in Allah's Way as dead. Nay, they live, finding  their  
sustenance  in the Presence  of their Lord;  They  rejoice  in the Bounty  provided  by 
Allah: and with regard  to those left behind,  who have not yet joined  them (in 
their bliss),  the (Martyrs)  glory  in the fact that on them is no fear, nor have they  
(cause  to) grieve."  (A1 Imran  169:170)585
^©5
In view of the honour  of the celebration  of (the Praises  of) Allah Almighty,  
the martyrdom  has been  given  a high and great  rank, for indeed,  what  is required  
is the good  end (of one's deeds).  What  we mean  by the end is to bid farewell  to 
this world  (by death)  and come  to Allah with wholehearted  devotion,  having  no 
relation  with anything  other than Him. If one is able to devote  his attention  
entirely  to Allah Almighty  during  his life, he could hardly  be able to die in the 
state except  (as a martyr)  in the row of the fighters  (in Allah's  Cause).  That's same
because  (by going to fight in Allah's  Way) one cuts off any desire for his life, 
property,  family and offspring,  or in other words, for this world (with its 
pleasures,  delights  and vanities),  which  he likes just for his life, and it is this life 
which  he regards  as slight  for the sake of his love for Allah  Almighty,  and seeking


Page 588:
586 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
His Good  Pleasure.  Thus,  one could  not devote  himself  wholeheartedly  to Allah  
Almighty  better  than  that.
For this reason,  the martyrdom  has been given a great superiority,  and its 
good merits  are beyond  calculation  according  to many  narrations.  It is narrated  
that when  Abdullah  Ibn Amr (Ibn Haram)  Al-Ansari  was killed  as martyr  on the 
day of (the holy battle  of) Uhud,  the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him” said to Jabir  (his son): "Should  I not give you glad tidings  O 
Jabir (pertaining  to your father's  destiny)?"  he said: "Yes, might  Allah give you 
good news (O Messenger  of Allah)!"  he said: "Allah  Almighty  brought  your  
father  to life and made him sit in front of Him,  with no curtain  between  them  
and said to him: "Ask Me O My servant  for any hope that you like (to be 
fulfilled)  so that I shall  give it to you."  He said: "O my Lord!  It is just to bring  me 
once again  back to this world,  so that I might  be killed  in the Cause  of You and 
Your Prophet."  On that Allah  Almighty  said: "I've already  preordained  that to 
this (world)  those  (who  died) should  not return  once  again."
On the other  hand,  it is to be killed  (as martyr)  which  causes  one to conclude  
(his journey  of deeds)  in such a state,  for were he not to be killed,  and were he 
to remain  alive for some time, perhaps  the desires  for this world  might  return  
to him and prevail  over his heart  on the exclusion  of the celebration  of Allah  
Almighty  to which  he has devoted  himself.  For this reason,  those  of knowledge  
fear so much  of the evil end (of their deeds).  Whatever  the heart  might  adhere  
to the celebration  of Allah  Almighty,  it is in the habit  of turning  from  one state  
to another,  and it might  deviate  to the desires  and lusts of this world,  as being  
not far from falling  victim  of weakness  from one time to another.  If anything  
belonging  to (the pleasures  and delights  of) this world  is present  in his heart  at 
the conclusion  of his life so much  that it prevails  over himself,  and he leaves  
the world  (by death)  in such a state,  it is about  to keep prevailing  over his heart  
to the extent  that even after death he will have liking for it, which  develops  
within  himself  the desire  to return  to it once again;  and this is, however,  due to 
one's litde portion  of the hereafter.  To be sure, one should  die on the same  
habits  on which  he lives, and will be resurrected  on the same habits  on which  
he dies.
Thus,  the safest  state to avoid such danger  is to conclude  one's deeds  with  
martyrdom,  particularly  if the purpose  of a martyr  is not to attain  property,  nor is 
it to be ascribed  to bravery  or anything  like that according  to the authentic  
narration:  on the contrary,  one's purpose  from martyrdom  should  be diverted  
only to the love of Allah  Almighty,  and make  superior  His Word  (of Islam).  It is 
this state which  Allah  Almighty  expresses  in His saying:  "Allah  has purchased  of 
the Believers  their  persons  and their  goods;  for theirs  (in return)  is the Garden  (of 
Paradise)."  (At-Tawbah  111)
Such a person  is him, who sells this world (with its perishable  delights  and 
pleasures)  for the hereafter  (with  its never-ending  bliss).


Page 589:
Book  nine:  Celebrations  and invocations
From  this point  of view, the state of martyr  then agrees  with the significance  
of your testimony  that 'there  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah',  for nothing  
is intended  by it other  than Ailah  Almighty,  and He Who  is intended  by it should  
be worshipped,  and he who is worshipped  should  be the God (of the worlds).  
This martyr  then professes,  with his state (of being  killed in Allah's  Cause)  that 
'there  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah',  for there is nothing  intended  (by 
his martyrdom)  other  than He. But he who professes  this only with his tongue,  
even though  his state does not help him attain it, his matter  is with Allah  
Almighty,  and there  is no fear of danger  for him.
For this reason,  the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be 
upon him” gave preference  to the testimony  'there is no god (to be 
worshipped)  but Allah'  over all other celebrations  and supplications,  and he 
made a mention  of that on many occasions  with no restrictions  by way of 
exhortation,  and on some he made a mention  of exhortation,  and on others  
he referred  to the restriction  of truthfulness  and sincerity,  as shown  from his 
statement:  "He, who says 'there  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah  with  
sincerity  (will enter  the Garden)."  The significance  of sincerity  here is to make  
the states  affirm  the words587
We then ask Allah  Almighty  to make  us, at the conclusion  of our journey  (of 
life and deeds)  from those  who profess  that 'there  is no god (to be worshipped)  
but Allah'  in deeds  and words,  in outward  and inward,  in order  that we would  bid 
farewell  to this world,  without  turning  (desirously)  to it, but rather  with aversion  
towards  it, and loving  for the meeting  of Allah  Almighty,  for indeed,  he who likes  
to meet Allah Almighty,  Allah likes to meet him, and he who dislikes  to meet  
Allah  Almighty,  Allah  dislikes  to meet  him.
Those  are some  references  to the significances  (and concepts)  of celebration  
(of the Praises  of Allah Almighty)  to which  nothing  could be added  within  the 
limits  of the science  of the practical  religion.
CHAPTER  TWO:  ON THE PROPRIETIES  AND EXCELLENCE  OF 
SUPPLICATION;  THE EXCELLENCE  OF SOME  HANDED  DOWN  
SUPPLICATIONS;  THE EXCELLENCE  OF ASKING  FOR  ALLAH ’S 
FORGIVENESS,  AND INVOKING  FOR  ALLAH ’S PRAYER  AND BLESSING  
UPON  THE MESSENGER  OF ALLAH
The Excellence  Of Supplication
Allah  Almighty  says: "When  My servants  ask you concerning  Me, I am indeed  
close (to them):  I listen  to the prayer  of every  suppliant  when  he calls on Me: let 
them  also, with a will, listen  to My call, and believe  in Me: that they may walk in 
the right  way."  (Al-Baqarah  186)
J i o&i  lij Jjl diiil isj3 >»
i Li-
He Almighty  further  says: "Call on your Lord  with humility  and in private:  for


Page 590:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
Allah  loves  not those  who trespass  beyond  bounds."  (Al-A'raf  55)
4 ® v. • 1 C—^ j4.jj ltjvai  *1 j-£Oi
Allah  says too: "And  your Lord says: "Call on Me; I will answer  your (Prayer):  
but those  who are too arrogant  to serve  Me will surely  find themselves  in Hell, in 
humiliation!""  (Ghafir  60)588
4 (£|S)
Allah Almighty  also says: "Say: "Call upon Allah, or call upon Rahman:  by 
whatever  name you call upon Him, (it is well): for to Him belong  the Most  
Beautiful  Names."  (Al-Isra'  110)
fLLiVfiii £ di '-oil
It is narrated  on the authority  of An-Nu'man  Ibn Bashir  from The Messenger  
of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" that he said: "Verily,  
supplication  is (a kind of) worship."  Then,  he recited:  "Call on Me; I will answer  
your  (Prayer)."  (Ghafir  60)
4O Jjj**  1 p-^=H)  Ulij $
The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" further  said:  
"Supplication  (of Allah)  is the marrow  of worship."  It is narrated  on the authority  
of Abu Hurairah  that The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon him" said: "Nothing  is much dearer to Allah Almighty  than the 
supplication."  According  to another  narration  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "A servant  (of Allah)  never  fails to receive  
the answer  of anyone  of the following  three  things:  a sin which  might  be forgiven  
for him, a good which  might  be hastened  on for him, or a good  which  might  be 
kept for him."
According  to Abu Dharr  "Allah  be pleased  with him": "It is sufficient  (for 
man) from supplication  with righteousness  as much  as is sufficient  from salt for 
food."  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said:  
"Ask  Allah Almighty  of His Bounty,  for Allah Almighty  likes to be asked (by His 
servants);  and the best act of worship  is to expect  for the relief."
The Proprieties  Of Supplication
Those  are ten, and they  go as follows:
The first is to seek, for his invocations  and supplications,  such noble  times  as 
the day of Arafah  (ninth  of Dhul-Hijjah)  from amongst  all the days of the year,  
and the month  of Ramadan  from amongst  all of the months,  Friday from  
amongst  all the days of the weeks,  and the last portion  of the night,  a short  time  
before  dawn from amongst  all the hours of the night in accordance  with the 
statement  of Allah  Almighty:  " And in the hours  of early  dawn,  they (were  found)  
praying  for Forgiveness."  (Adh-Dhariyat  18);


Page 591:
Book  nine:  Celebrations  and invocations 589
i S|3) 'Kp }
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said:  
"When  only one-third  the night remains  every  night,  Allah Almighty  brings  His 
Glory  to the nearest  heaven  and say: 'Who does invoke  Me, so that I would  
answer  his invocation?  Who does ask Me, so that I would  give him (what  he asks  
for)? Who does ask for My Forgiveness,  so that I would  forgive  for him?"'  It was 
said that  Jacob  "Peace  be upon him" said (according  to the Holy Qur'an):  "Soon  
will I ask my Lord for forgiveness  for you: for He is indeed  Oft-Forgiving,  Most  
Merciful"  (Yusuf  98)
jajJ -Jj ^5sJ jL»sZ.\ Jli ^
He invoked  Allah  Almighty  at the last portion  of the night,  a short  time before  
dawn.  It was said that in the early dawn,  he stood and went on invoking  Allah  
Almighty,  and his sons stood and went on saying 'Amen'  behind him in 
confirmation  to his invocation.  Then,  Allah Almighty  revealed  to him that 'I've  
forgiven  for them,  and made  them  Prophets'.
The second  is that one should  avail himself  of the honoured  occasions  and 
states (to invoke  Allah  Almighty  therein):  according  to Abu Hurairah  "Allah  be 
pleased  with him":  "Verily,  the gates  of the heaven  are opened  at the time of the 
marsh  of the rows (of fighters)  in Allah's  Cause,  at the time of rainfall,  and at the 
time of establishing  the written (obligatory)  prayers:  so, you should aval ’ 
yourselves  of those occasions  to invoke  Allah therein."  According  to Mujahic  
"Verily,  the (written  obligatory)  prayers  have been made  at the best times of th 
day: so, stick to invoking  Allah Almighty  following  them."  The Messenger  ot 
Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "The  invocation  (of Allah  in 
the period)  between  both Adhan  (Call to Prayer)  and Iqamah  (Call to Prayer  
Establishment)  could hardly be rejected."  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace be upon him" further  said: "The invocation  of a fasting  
person  could  hardly  be rejected."
As a matter  of fact, the honour  of the time refers to the honour  of the state  
itself: the last portion  of the night  a short  time before  dawn,  for example,  is the 
due time of the purity  and sincerity  of the heart,  in which  it becomes  entirely  free 
from muddles;  and both the day of Arafah  and Friday  are times for the assembly  
of attentions  in which  the hearts  co-operate  together  to draw forth Allah's  Mercy  
upon  them...and  so on. This  is one of the reasons  for the honour  of the times,  in 
addition  to many  mysteries  which  they have, and which  no human  being  could  
easily  know.
The posture  of prostration  also is one of the honoured  states in which  
invocation  is more fitting  to receive  answer.  In this connection  it is narrated  that 
Abu Hurairah  said: The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" said: "The servant  becomes  the closest  to his Lord Almighty ’ when he is 
prostrating:  so, you should  make  much  of your invocations  therein."  It is further  
narrated  on the authority  of Ibn Abbas  "Allah  be pleased  with both" that The


Page 592:
590 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "I've been  
forbidden  to recite die Qur'an  while being in the posture  of bowing  or 
prostration:  as for bowing,  you should  celebrate  the Greatness  of the Lord  
Almighty;  and as for prostration,  endeavour  to invoke  (Allah  Almighty)  as much  
as you can, for it is more  fitting  to receive  answer."
The third is that one should  invoke  while facing  the Qiblah,  and raising  his 
hand so high that the whiteness  of his armpits  would  be visible.  In this context,  it 
is narrated  on the authority  of Jabir Ibn Abdullah  that The Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" came  the standing  place  of Arafah,  and 
faced  the Qiblah,  and kept invoking  Allah  Almighty  until the sun set. It is further  
narrated  on the authority  of Salman  that he said: The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "Verily,  your Lord Almighty  is so much  
Kind  and Generous  that He feels shy of returning  the hands  of His servants  with  
failure  once  they raise them  to Him (with  their  invocations)."
It is narrated  on the authority  of Anas that The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him" used to raise his hands  in his invocation  so high  
that the whiteness  of his armpits  would  be visible,  and he never  beckoned  with  
his fingers."  It is narrated  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that once The  
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" passed  by a man  
who was invoking,  and beckoning  with both his index  fingers,  thereupon  he said 
to him: "Make  it only with the help of one (finger)!  Make  it only with the help of 
one (finger)!"  he meant  that he should  beckon  with only the index  finger  (of his 
right hand, in reference  to the Allah's  Oneness).  According  to Abu Ad-Darda'  
"Allah  be pleased  with him": "You should  raise those hands (of yours in your  
invocations)  before  they  are bound  in fetters."
Furthermore,  one should  pass his hand over his face at the conclusion  of his 
invocation.  In this issue,  it is narrated  on the authority  of Umar  that he said: "It 
was the habit of The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon  
him", whenever  he stretched  his hands to invoke  (Allah Almighty),  not to 
withdraw  them until he would  pass them over his face." It is narrated  on the 
authority  of Ibn Abbas:  "Whenever  The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" invoked  (Allah  Almighty),  he would  hold his hands  together,  
making  their  insides  opposite  to his face."  Those  are different  states  pertaining  to 
the hand  during  the invocation.  On the other  hand,  one should  not raise his sight  
up to the sky during  his supplication.  It is narrated  that The Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "Let some people  desist from  
raising  their sights  up to the sky during  their supplication,  otherwise,  their sights  
would  be snatched  away."
The fourth  is that the invoker  should  make  his voice  a middle  course  in such  
a way as to be not aloud,  nor in a low tone.  This is, however,  due to the narration  
(of Al-Bukhari  and others)  on the authority  of Abu Musa  Al-Ash'ari  in which  he 
said: We came (back from journey)  in the company  of The Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" and when  we approached  Medina,  The  
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" went  on glorifying


Page 593:
Book  nine: Celebrations  and invocations 591
Allah  and the people  did the same  with him, but they raised  their voices  so high  
that The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "O 
people!  Verily,  (Allah  Almighty)  the One Whom  you invoke  is neither  deaf nor 
absent:  undoubtedly,  the One Whom  you invoke  is (so close to you that He) lies 
between  you and the necks  of your  riding  mounts."
In comment  on the statement  of Allah  Almighty:  "Speak  not your prayer  aloud,  
nor speak  it in a low tone: but seek  a middle  course  between"  (Al-Isra'  110)
C. 9 ^
4 O i'lliVf  £ iff ^/\  i\y>i\  J '&\ JT ji >
A'ishah  "Allah be pleased  with her" said: "He refers to supplication  and 
invocation."  Allah  Almighty  praised  His Prophet  Zakariyya  "Peace  be upon  him"  
in His saying:  "Behold!  he cried to his Lord  in secret."  (Maryam  3)
Allah Almighty  says in this connection:  "Call on your Lord with humility  
and in private:  for Allah loves not those  who trespass  beyond  bounds."  (Al- 
A'raf  55)
4 1 -><j] Ij-COl y
The fifth is that one should not be ostentatious  in using rhyme in his 
supplications  and invocations.  That's  because  the invoker  becomes  in the same  
state of him who shows  humility  (towards  his Lord) for whom  ostentation  is nor 
fitting.  In this connection,  it is narrated  that The Messenger  of Allah "Allah':  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "There  will be a people,  whose  habit  is tc 
trespass  beyond  due bounds  in supplication."  In confirmation  to that, Allah  
Almighty  says: " Call on your Lord with humility  and in private:  for Allah  loves  
not those  who trespass  beyond  bounds."  (Al-A'raf  55)
4 CgS ^ y ,4jJ <1*3-5  ^5Zj ^
In comment  on it, it was said that it meant  to be ostentatious  in the use of 
rhymes.
It is more fitting  for one not to go beyond  the handed  down  invocations  and 
supplications,  for he might  trespass  beyond  due bounds  in his invocation  and ask 
what  is not in his interest;  and this is due to the fact that not everyone  is perfect  
in expressing  supplication.  For this reason,  it is narrated  on the authority  of 
Mu'adh  that the learned  people  will be needed  in the Garden,  when  it will be said 
to the inhabitants  of the Garden:  "Show  your hopes!"  but they will not know  
how to express  their hopes  until they will learn that from those endued  with  
knowledge.
It is narrated  that The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon  him" said: "Beware  of sticking  to the use of rhyme  in your supplications!  It 
suffices  anyone  of you to say: "O Allah!  I ask You (to admit  me to) the Garden,  
and (to bestow  upon  me) such of words  and deeds  as draws  me close  to it, and I 
seek refuge  with You from the fire (of Hell) and from such of words  and deeds


Page 594:
592 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
as draws me close to it!" it is narrated  that The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "There  will be a people,  whose  habit  is to 
trespass  beyond  due bounds  in supplication  and ablution."  It is narrated  that one 
of the early  good  men passed  by a storyteller  who was invoking  Allah  and he was 
using  rhymes  ostentatiously,  thereupon  he said to him: "Do you try to be showy  
in front of Allah Almighty?  I bear witness  that I saw Habib the non-Arab  
invoking  Allah  in which  he said nothing  more  than the following:  "O Allah!  make  
us good!  O Allah!  disgrace  us naught  on the Day of  Judgement!  O Allah!  help us 
with success  to attain  good!"  and the people  were invoking  from every  direction  
behind  him.
According  to a learned  man: "You should  invoke  (Allah  Almighty)  with the 
tongue  of humility  and not with the tongue  of eloquence  and fluency.”  It is said 
that the learned  among  the Substitutes  (Abdal)  invoke  (Allah  Almighty)  with no 
more than seven words if not less; and this is attested  clearly from the 
conclusion  of the Surah of Al-Baqarah,  for Allah Almighty  never tells His 
servants  about  invocations  and supplications  in any location  (of the Qur'an)  
more  than that.
It should  be known  to you that what is intended  by using rhyme  is to be 
ostentatious  in speech;  and this is not fitting  for showing  humility  and submission  
(to the Lord),  otherwise,  there are, in the supplications  handed  down from The  
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" some consonant  
words,  but not flamboyantly.  A mention  might  be made of the following:  "(O 
Allah)  I ask You to grand  me safety  from the Day of the threat  and to admit  me 
to the Garden  on the Day of Eternity,  in the company  of Your  nearest  devotees  
and martyrs,  and those  who used to offer  bowings  and prostrations  so much  (in 
their prayers),  who fulfill their covenants:  Verily,  You are Oft-Merciful,  Full of 
Loving-Kindness,  Who  always  do what  You will." (As'aluka  al-amn  min yawm  al- 
wa'id,  wal-jannah  yawm  al-khulud,  ma' al-muqarrabin  ash-shuhud,  ar-rukka'  as- 
sujud, al-muwfin  bil-uhud:  innaka  Rahim  wadud,  wa'innaka  tafalu ma turid).  
There  are other  examples  like that.
Let one then limit himself  to such of supplications  and invocations  as is 
handed  down (from the Prophet  and his companions),  otherwise,  let him 
supplicate  with the tongue  of humility  and submission,  and keep himself  from  
ostentation  and using  rhyme  pretentiously,  since showing  humility  is the dearest  
in the Sight  of Allah  Almighty.
The sixth is that one should  show humility,  submission,  desire (for Allah's  
reward)  and fear (of Allah's  punishment).  Allah Almighty  says: "These  (three)  
were ever quick in emulation  in good works;  they used to call on Us with love  
and reverence,  and humble  themselves  before  Us." (Al-Anbiya  90)
He Almighty  further  says: " Call on your  Lord with humility  and in private:  for 
Allah  loves  not those  who trespass  beyond  bounds."  (Al-A'raf  55)


Page 595:
Book  nine: Celebrations  and invocations  --------------------------
According  to a certain  narration  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon him" said: "If Allah Almighty  loves one of His servants,  He puts  
him to trial until He hears his (invocation  and supplication  with) humility  (and  
submission)."
The seventh  is that one should  affirm  his invocation,  with certainty  that it 
will receive  answer  (from Allah Almighty),  and trust in his hope in Him. In 
confirmation  to that The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" said: "Let none  of you say, whenever  he invokes  (Allah  Almighty):  'O Allah!  
forgive  for me if You so will! O Allah!  bestow  mercy  upon  me if You so will!' but 
rather,  let him affirm  his invocation  since there  is none to compel  Him Almighty  
(to do what He wills not)."  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon him" further  said: "When  anyone  of you invokes  (Allah  Almighty),  let 
him make great his desire, for nothing  is greater  than Allah Almighty."  The 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" also said: "Invoke  
Allah with certainty  that (your invocation)  will receive  answer  (from Him), for 
indeed,  Allah Almighty  never  responds  to the invocation  of him whose  heart is 
heedless."
Sufyan  Ibn Uyainah  said: "Let nothing  of such (of evil) as anyone  of you 
knows  about himself  prevent  him from invoking  (Allah Almighty),  for verily,  
Allah  Almighty  responded  to the invocation  of the worst  of His creatures,  Iblis  
"Allah's  Curse  be upon  him" when  he said: "O my Lord!  give me then respite  till 
the Day the (dead) are raised."  He (Allah)  said: "Respite  then is granted  you."  
(Sad 79:80)593
!
4 0 0 b&S#  JJ 93 »
The eighth  is that one should  be persistent  in his invocation,  which  he should  
repeat  thrice,  in accordance  with the narration  on the authority  of Ibn Mas'ud,  in 
which  he said: "Whenever  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon him" invoked  (Allah  Almighty)  he would  invoke  thrice,  and whenever  he 
asked (Him for anything)  he would  ask (Him) thrice."  On the other  hand, one 
should  not regard  the answer  (to his invocation)  too slow to come  in accordance  
with the statement  of The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon him": "(The  invocation  of) anyone  of you receives  answer  as long as he is 
not hasty  as shown  from his saying:  'I've invoked  (Allah)  but my invocation  has 
received  no answer';  and if you invoke,  ask Allah  so much,  for indeed  you invoke  
One Who  is Most  Generous."
One of the learned  men said: "I've been asking  Allah Almighty  to fulfill a 
certain  need to me for twenty  years, and He has given me no answer,  even  
though  I still expect  for an response  to my invocation:  I've asked  Allah  Almighty  
to help me leave what concerns  me not." The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "If anyone  of you invokes  for a certain  
thing  and he comes  to know  that his invocation  has received  answer,  let him say:


Page 596:
594 The quarter  of the acts of worship
'Praise  be to Allah  with Whose  Favour  all good things  are accomplished';  and if 
the answer  slows  to come  to him let him say: 'Praise  be to Allah  for every  state  
(in which  I should  be)'."
The ninth  is that one should  commence  his invocation  by mentioning  the 
Name  of Allah Almighty,  for it is not proper  to him to begin with asking  
directly.  In this connection,  it is narrated  on the authority  of Salamah  Ibn Al- 
Akwa'  that he said: "I've never  heard  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon him" having  commenced  his invocation  but that he began  
with the statement:  'Glorified  be my Lord,  Most  High,  Most  Supreme,  Grantor  
(of favours)  without  measure'."  According  to Abu Sulaiman  Ad-Darani:  
"Whoever  likes to ask Allah for anything,  let him begin  with invoking  Allah's  
Prayer  and Blessing  upon the Messenger  of Allah,  then ask Him for his need,  
and then conclude  with invoking  Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon  the Prophet  
of Allah;  and that's  because  Allah  Almighty  accepts  both prayers  and He is too 
generous  to reject  what  is between  them."  It is narrated  on the authority  of Abu  
Talib Al-Makki  that The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon  him" said: "If you ask Allah  for anything,  you should  begin  with invoking  
Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon  me, for it is not befitting  for the generosity  of 
Allah  Almighty,  when He is asked for two needs,  to fulfill one and reject  the 
other."
The tenth  pertains  to the internal  proprieties:  the original  reason  for which  an 
invocation  receives  answer  is that one should,  first of all, turn to Allah in 
repentance  (with sincerity),  cancel  out injustices,  and to turn to Allah  with true 
attention:  this is the near cause  which  underlies  the answer  of any invocation.
In this respect,  it is narrated  on the authority  of Ka'b Al-Ahbar  that during  the 
lifetime  of Moses,  the Messenger  of Allah "Peace  be upon  him" the people  were  
given to severe  draught.  Moses  came out with the children  of Israel to invoke  
Allah  for rain, but they were  not provided  with rain. He came  out with them  with  
the same intention,  but they received  no rain. Allah  Almighty  inspired  to Moses  
"Peace  be upon  him" that "I am not to respond  to you and to those  who are with  
you as long as there is among  you the one who goes about  with calumnies  (to 
sow the seeds of hatred  among  the people)."  Moses  "Peace  be upon  him" said:  
"O Lord! Who is he so that we should  drive him out from among  us?" Allah  
Almighty  revealed  to Moses:  "O Moses!  I forbid  you to adhere  to talebearing,  and 
that anyone  of you should  go about  with calumnies."  Moses  said to the children  
of Israel: "Turn to your Lord all together  in repentance  from being  given to 
talebearing."  When  they repented,  Allah  Almighty  sent rainfall  upon  them.
It is narrated  on the authority  of Sa'id Ibn Jubair  that he said: During  the 
lifetime  of one of the kings of the children  of Israel,  the people  were given to 
severe  famine.  They  invoked  Allah  for rain, and their king said: "Let Allah  send  
down  the rain upon  us from the sky, otherwise,  we shall cause  harm  to Him."  It 
said: "How  could  you be able to cause  harm  to Him seeing  that He is in the was
heaven?"  he said: "I could kill His devotees  and those who do good in His 
obedience,  and this would  be a source  of harm to Him."  Then,  Allah  Almighty


Page 597:
Book  nine:  Celebrations  and invocations 595
sent down  rain from  the sky upon  them.
According  to Sufyan  Ath-Thawri:  I was reported  that the children  of Israel  
befallen  by a seven-year  famine  and it was so much  severe  that they were were
forced  to eat the dead bodies  from the dumps  and they also ate the children.  
During  this famine,  they used to come out to the mountains,  weeping  and 
invoking  Allah  with humility.  Allah  Almighty  inspired  to their Prophets  "Peace  be 
upon them"  that "Even  if you walk to Me on foot until your knees  become  bare  
and your hands  rise up to reach the sky, and your tongues  weary  and cease to 
invoke  more,  I will not answer  the invocation  of anyone  of you, nor will I bestow  
mercy  upon the weeping  among  you until you cancel  out the injustices  of those  
who have been wronged."  They did accordingly,  thereupon  they were provided  
with rain as of the very day they did.
According  to Malik  Ibn Dinar:  The children  of Israel fell victims  of a severe  
draught,  thereupon  they came out so many times (to invoke  Allah for rain),  
thereupon  Allah  Almighty  revealed  to their Prophet  to tell them that "You  come  
out to Me with impure  bodies,  and raise to Me hands  which  shed the blood  (of 
each other),  and you have filled your abdomens  from  what  is unlawful:  now, My 
Wrath  has become  strong  upon you, and you will not become  but more far 
removed  from (the mercy  of) Me."
According  to Abu As-Siddiq  An-Naji:  Once,  Solomon  "Peace  be upon him"  
came  out to invoke  Allah for rain and on the way he came  upon an ant thrown  
on its back  and it was raising  its sides  up to the sky and saying:  "O Allah!  we are a 
sect from among  Your creatures,  and we could not be independent  from Your  
sustenance:  ruin us not with the sins of anyone  else other than us." On that 
Solomon  "Peace  be upon him" said (to those  who were with him): "Return,  for 
you have been  provided  with water  with the help of the invocation  of some  other  
than you."
According  to Al-Awza'i:  The people  came out to invoke  Allah for rain 
thereupon  Bilal Ibn Sa'd stood among  them and addressed  them saying: "O 
assembly  of those who are present  here! Do you not state that you're  sinful?"  
they said: "Yes,  O by Allah."  on that he said: "O Allah!  we heard  You having  said 
(in Your  Book):  " no ground  (of complaint)  can there be against  those  who do 
right:  and Allah  is Oft-Forgiving,  Most  Merciful."  (At-Tawbah  91)
Verily,  we've  stated  that we are sinful:  should  Your  Forgiveness  not be but for 
such people  as we? O Allah!  forgive  us and bestow  mercy  upon  us, and provide  
us with water!"  He raised  both his hands,  and they raised  theirs,  and they were  
provided  with rain.
It was said to Malik  Ibn Dinar:  "Invoke  your Lord for us (to provide  us with  
rain)."  He said: "Verily,  you regard  the rain too slow to come even though  I 
regard  the stones  too 
him" came out to invoke  for rain, and when  those (who were with him) were  
bored  Jesus "Peace  be upon him" said to them: "Let such of you as hasslow to come."  It is narrated  that Jesus "Peace  be upon


Page 598:
596 The quarter  of the acts of worship
committed  a sin return. ” All of them returned  barring  one who remained  with  
him in the desert.  Jesus "Peace  be upon him" asked him: "Have you not 
committed  any sin?" he said: "By Allah!  I do not know  that I've committed  a 
sin, except  that one day I was offering  prayer  when  a woman  passed  by me and 
I cast a glance  at her with this eye of mine,  and when she went far from me, I 
entered  my finger  into my eye which  I removed  and followed  the woman  with  
it." Jesus "Peace  be upon him" said to him: "Invoke  Allah so that I would  say 
'Amen*  in confirmation  to your invocadon."  He invoked  (Allah)  and then the 
sky turned  to be filled with clouds  and it rained  and thus they were provided  
with water.
According  to Yahya  Al-Ghassani:  During  the lifedme  of (the Prophet)  David  
"Peace  be upon him" the people  were befallen  by a severe  draught,  and they  
chose  three  of their learned  men and came  out to invoke  for rain with the help  
of their (invocadon).  One of them said: "O Allah!  Verily,  You have revealed  in 
the Torah  that we should  excuse  him who wrongs  us: O Allah!  we've  wronged  
ourselves,  so, please,  excuse  us!" the second  said: "O Allah!  You have revealed  
in the Torah  that we should  emancipate  our slaves:  O Allah!  we are Your  slaves,  
so, please,  emancipate  us!" the third said: "O Allah!  You have revealed  in the 
Torah  that we should  not discard  such of indigent  and needy  as stand at the 
gates  of our houses:  O Allah!  we are indigent  and needy,  standing  at Your  Gate,  
so, please,  reject  not our invocadon!"  then,  they were  provided  with rain.
According  to Ata' As-Sulami:  We received  no rain (for a long  time) thereupon  
we came out to invoke  (Allah)  for rain, and behold!  Sa'dun  the Mad was in the 
graveyard.  He cast a glance at me and said: "O Ata'! is this the day of 
resurrecdon?  Has what the graves  contain  been scattered  abroad?"  I said: "No,  
but we did receive  no rainfall  (for a long time) thereupon  we came  out to invoke  
(Allah)  for rain." He said: "O Ata'! (have  you come  out to invoke  for rain) with  
earthly  hearts  or with heavenly  hearts?"  I said: "No, with heavenly  hearts."  He 
said: "Let it be far (from  the truth) O Ata'! tell those  who make  dazzling  display  
not to display  their  adornment  so much  for indeed  the One Who  watches  them  is 
All-Seeing."  Then,  he stared  at the sky with his eye and said: "O my God, my 
Lord and my Master!  Destroy  not Your country  with the sins of Your  servants!  
But by virtue  of the well-guarded  mystery  of Your Names,  and such of Your  
Favours  as hidden  behind  the veil, provide  us with sweet and fresh water in 
abundance  therewith  to give life to the servants  and water  the (different  parts of 
the) countries:  O (Allah)  Who has power  over all things."  Ata' said: He had no 
sooner  completed  his speech than there appeared  in the sky lightning  and 
thunder,  which  caused  a great quandty  of rain to fall, as much  as the mouths  of 
water-skins.  Then,  he turned  away  while  saying  (in the form  of poetic  verses):
"Verily,  both the ascetics  and worshippers  have been prosperous  when they  
made  themselves  hungry  for the Sake of Allah,  they kept  wakeful  during  the night  
with their sick eyes open, in love (for Allah Almighty),  thereupon  their night


Page 599:
Book  nine:  Celebrations  and invocations  
passed  while  they were sleepless.  They  were occupied  by the worship  of Allah  so 
much  that the people  came  to think  madness  befell  them."
According  to Ibn Al-Mubarak:  I came  to Medina  in a year, in which  there  was 
a severe  draught.  The people  came  out to invoke  (Allah)  for rain, and I came  out 
with them,  and behold!  There  came  a black  boy with two pieces  of sackcloth,  one 
of which  he took as his lower  garment,  and threw  the other  upon his shoulder.  
He sat by my side, and I heard  him saying:  "O my God! The abundance  of sins 
and the evil deeds  have worn  out the faces in Your  Sight;  and You have detained  
the rain of the sky from us in order  to penalize  Your  servants  because  of that: 1 
ask You, Most Forbearing,  Most Tolerant,  from Whom  His servants  know  but 
what is good,  to provide  them with water  just at that dme, just at that dme."  He 
kept saying  'At that dme, at that dme' until the sky came to be dressed  in clouds,  
and the rain fell from every  side. 1 came to Al-Fudail  who asked me: "Why  do I 
see you grief-stricken?"  he said: "There is an important  matter, to which  
somebody  other  than us has preceded,  and thus he undertook  it apart from us." I 
related  to him the story,  thereupon  Al-Fudail  cried and fell unconscious.
It is narrated  that Umar (Ibn Al-Khattab)  "Allah be pleased  with him"  
invoked  (Allah Almighty)  for rain with the help of Al-Abbas  (the Prophet's  
paternal  uncle)  "Allah  be pleased  with him",  and when  Umar  finished  from his 
invocation,  Al-Abbas  said: "O Allah! no distress  descends  from the sky but 
because  of a great sin, and it is not removed  but by virtue  of repentance;  and 
the people  have turned  to You with the help of me, in view of my position  
from Your Prophet  "Peace  be upon him";  and those  are our hands,  (which  we 
raise) to You with our sins, and those are our forelocks  turning  to You in 
repentance;  and You are the Guardian  Who do not neglect  the straying  ones  
(among  Your  wards),  nor do You leave the old one in an abode  of loss: verily,  
the young  one has showed  humility  to You,  and the old one has submitted  with  
leniency  to You,  and the voices  have risen high with complaints;  and You know  
the deepest  secrets  and what is hidden:  O Allah! relieve  them with your relief  
(of water)  before  they despair  and perish,  since none despairs  from the Spirit  
and sadsfacdon  of Allah  Almighty  but these  who reject  faith."  However,  he had 
sooner  completed  his speech  than the clouds  in the sky became  as high as 
mountains.597
no
The Excellence  Of Invoking  For Allah's  Prayer  And Blessing  Upon
The Messenger  Of Allah
Allah  Almighty  says: " Allah  and His Angels  send prayers  and blessings  on the 
Prophet:  O you that believe!  send you prayers  and blessings  on him, and salute  
him with all respect."  (Al-Ahzab  56)
It is narrated  that one day The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon him" appeared  and (the signs of) happiness  were visible  on his face and


Page 600:
598 The quarter  of the acts of worship
he said: "Gabriel  "Peace  be upon him" came to me and said: 'Are you not 
pleased,  O Muhammad  that none from amongst  your nation  invokes  for Allah's  
Prayer  and Blessing  upon  you once but that I invoke  Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  
upon him ten times,  and none from amongst  your nation  salutes  you once but 
that 1 salute  him ten times?"'  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon  him" further  said: "None  invokes  Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon me 
but that the angels  invoke  for Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon him as much  as 
he does  upon  me: let him then make  little or much  of it if he so likes."
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said:  
"Such  of people  as are closer  to me are those who invoke  Allah's  Prayer  and 
Blessing  upon  me more  among  them."  The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon  him" said: "It suffices  a believer  for a niggard  not to invoke  
Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon me when a mendon  is made of me in his 
presence."  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him"  
further  said: "Invoke  Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon me so much  on Friday."  
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" also said:  
"Whoever  among  my nadon  invokes  Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon  me (even  
once),  ten good deeds  are written  for him, and ten evil deeds  are plotted  out of 
him."
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said:  
"Whoever  says, on hearing  the Call to prayer and the call to prayer  
establishment:  'O Allah, Lord of this perfect  call and the established  prayer:  
send Your  Prayer  and Blessing  upon  Muhammad,  Your  servant  and Messenger,  
and give him the access  (to intercession),  superiority  (over  the people)  and high  
rank, and the intercession  on the Day of Judgement,  my intercession  then is 
assured  to him." The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" said too: "He, who invokes  Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon me in a 
book,  the angels  keep asking  for Allah's  Forgiveness  as long as my name  is in 
this book."  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him"  
said: "On earth,  there  are traveling  angels,  who convey  to me the salutations  of 
those of my nadon."  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon him" said: "None  (of my nadon)  salutes  me with peace but that Allah  
Almighty  brings  my spirit  back  to me in order  to return  the salutadon  to him."
It is narrated  that it was said to the Messenger  of Allah:  "O Messenger  of 
Allah!  How  would  we invoke  for Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon  you?"  The  
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: Say: "O 
Allah! send Your Prayer  upon Muhammad,  Your servant,  upon his family,  
wives  and offspring  in the same  way as You sent Your  Prayer  upon  Abraham  
and upon the family  of Abraham;  and send Your  Blessing  upon  Muhammad,  
his wives and offspring  in the same way as You sent Your Blessing  upon  
Abraham  and the family  of Abraham  (in the worlds):  You are Praiseworthy,  
Most  Glorious."


Page 601:
Book  nine:  Celebrations  and invocations
It is narrated  that after the death  of The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon  him",  Umar  Ibn Al-Khattab  was heard  while  he was weeping  
and saying:  "Let my father  and mother  sacrifice  their lives for you O Messenger  
of Allah! There  was (at first) a trunk (of a date-palm)  to which  you used to 
address  the people,  and when  the people  increased  in number,  you took a pulpit,  
in order  to cause  them  to hear you, thereupon  the trunk  moaned  for your  leaving  
him, and it did not become  silent  until you placed  your hand over it: of a surety,  
your nadon  is more fitting  to moan  for you when  you left them (by death).  Let 
my father  and mother  sacrifice  their lives for you O Messenger  of Allah!  Your  
superiority  (over all of the people)  in the Sight of Allah  Almighty  has attained  
such a degree  as He made  the obedience  of you a part of the obedience  of Him  
when  He Almighty  said: "He who obeys  the Messenger,  obeys  Allah;  but if any 
turn away,  We have not sent you to watch  over their (evil deeds)."  (An-Nisa'  80)
^ C|p). ^Jjj ^ ^-Ll JJLS ^
Let my father  and mother  sacrifice  their lives for you O Messenger  of Allah!  
Your superiority  (over all of the people)  in the Sight of Allah Almighty  has 
attained  such a degree  as He informed  you of His forgiving  you before  He told 
you of the sin when He said: "Allah  give you grace!  why did you grant them  
exemption  until those  who told the truth were seen by you in a clear light, and 
you had proved  the liars?."  (At-Tawbah  43)
4 ^ 'll} C-jil  pj vlLp <U)T lip «»
Let my father  and mother  sacrifice  their lives for you O Messenger  of Allah!  
Your superiority  (over all of the people)  in the Sight of Allah Almighty  has 
attained  such a degree  as He Almighty  sent you as the last of the Prophets,  even  
though  He made  you the first of them to be mentioned  when  He said: " And  
remember  We took from the Prophets  their Covenant:  as (We did) from you:  
from  Noah,  Abraham,  Moses,  and Jesus the son of Maty:  We took from them  a 
solemn  Covenant."  (Al-Ahzab  7)
od <_^f3  <^->*3  (^x!3  ^*3  a*
Let my father  and mother  sacrifice  their lives for you O Messenger  of Allah!  
Your superiority  (over all of the people)  in the Sight of Allah Almighty  has 
attained  such a degree  as the denizens  of the fire, while being punished  in 
between  its layers,  would  hope that they should  have obeyed  you, as shown  from  
their saying  (in the Holy  Book  on the Day that their faces will be turned  upside  
down  in the Fire: "Woe  to us! would  that we had obeyed  Allah  and obeyed  the 
Messenger!"  (Al-Ahzab  66)
^ uiblj  2»T L*il lCL ojbJl  J JAsu fa ^599
3Jj ^


Page 602:
600 The quarter  of the acts of worship
Let my father  and mother  sacrifice  their  lives for you O Messenger  of Allah!  If 
Moses  "Peace  be upon him" was given (as a miracle)  the rock therefrom  the 
springs  of water  gushed  forth,  what  should  be more  marvelous  than your fingers  
when  the water  sprang  from  them?  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  you".  Let 
my father and mother  sacrifice  their lives for you O Messenger  of Allah! If 
Solomon,  son of David  was given by Allah Almighty  the (miracle  of the) wind  
with its early morning  (stride)  was a month's  (journey),  and its evening  (stride)  
was a month's  (journey),  what should  be more marvelous  than the Buraq on 
which  you ascended  to the seventh  seven,  and then (you returned)  on the same  
night and offered  the Morning  prayer  at Abtah?  "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon  you".  Let my father  and mother  sacrifice  their  lives for you O Messenger  of 
Allah!  If Jesus  "Peace  be upon  him" was given  by Allah  Almighty  the (faculty  to) 
give life to the dead (by Allah's  Will),  what should  be more marvelous  than the 
poisoned  sheep  when  it talked  to you while  it was roasted,  and its shoulder  said 
to you: "Eat me not for I'm poisoned"?  Let my father  and mother  sacrifice  their  
lives for you O Messenger  of Allah! Noah "Peace  be upon him" invoked  evil 
against  his people  saying:  "O my Lord!  Leave  not of the Unbelievers,  a single  one 
on earth! "For, if You do leave (any of) them, they will but mislead  Your  
devotees,  and they  will breed  none  but wicked  ungrateful  ones."  (Noah  26:27)
X! 1*4^ oj {(Jj ijiJS  if,^ v'T jp V 03 Jiij
Verily,  had you invoked  such evil against  us, surely,  we would have been  
ruined:  your back was trodden  (by the pagans  and unbelievers  of the Quraish),  
your face was wounded  and your canine  tooth  was broken,  and in spite of that,  
you refused  to say but good  when  you said: "O Allah!  Forgive  for my people  for 
they know not." Let my father and mother  sacrifice  their lives for you O 
Messenger  of Allah!  there followed  you, in spite of your short  life and few years  
(no more than sixty-three  which  you lived among  us) such (a great number  of 
people)  as did not follow  Noah  in spite of his long life and numerous  years (nine  
hundred  and fifty which  he lived among  his people):  verily,  a great number  of 
people  (nearly  one hundred  and twenty  thousand)  believed  with you, but it was 
only a few who believed  with him. Let my father  and mother  sacrifice  their lives  
for you O Messenger  of Allah!  had you not sat but with those  rival unto you (in 
status  and position),  surely,  you would  have sat with none of us; and had you not 
married  but from those rival unto you (in status  and position)  you would  have  
married  from none  of us; and had you not had food but with those  rival unto you 
(in status  and position),  you would  have had food with none of us: but by Allah,  
you sat with us, married  from us, and had food with us, as well as you put on 
(garments  of) wool, rode (such mounts  as) the donkey,  and made others  ride 
behind  you, and you also placed  your (leather  of) food on the ground,  and licked  
your fingers  (after  finishing  from  eating)  out of showing  humbleness."


Page 603:
601 Book  nine: Celebrations  and invocations
According  to one of the learned  men: "I used to write the Prophedc  tradidons  
in which  I invoked  Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon  the Prophet  "Peace  be upon  
him" but I did not mind to pay salutation  to him. While  I was sleeping,  I saw the 
Prophet  "Peace  be upon him" in a dream,  and he said to me: "Should  you not 
complete  your invoking  prayer  upon me in your book?"  after that, I've never  
written  anything  but that in which  I invoked  Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon  
him, and paid salutation  to him."  It is narrated  on the authority  of Abu  Al-Hassan  
that he said: I saw the Prophet  "Peace  be upon him" in a dream  while I was 
sleeping,  and I asked him: "O Messenger  of Allah!  What  is the reward  of Ash-  
Shafi ’i on behalf  of you for his statement  in his book  'the Message'  (Ar-Risalah):  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon Muhammad  whenever  he is mentioned  by 
those who remember  him, and whenever  the heedless  neglect  to remember  
him"?"  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said:  
"His reward,  on behalf  of me, is that he would not be made to stand for 
reckoning."
The Excellence  Of Asking  For Allah's  Forgiveness
Allah  Almighty  says: "And those  who, having  done something  to be ashamed  
of, or wronged  their own souls, earnestly  bring Allah to mind, and ask for 
forgiveness  for their  sins."  (A1 Imran  135)
^ awT ^flj  1 tyjli  jl 1^1*3 lij ^^
According  to both Alqamah  and Al-Aswad,  Abdullah  Ibn Mas'ud  "Allah  be 
pleased  with him" said: "In Allah's  Book,  there are two Holy Verses,  and no 
servant  commits  a sin and then recites  them  and asks for Allah's  Forgiveness,  but 
that Allah  Almighty  forgives  for him. Those  are: " And those  who, having  done  
something  to be ashamed  of, or wronged  their own souls,  earnestly  bring  Allah  to 
mind,  and ask for forgiveness  for their  sins" (A1 Imran  135)
iS  IZS£$il 9£[ >
And: "If anyone  does evil or wrongs  his own soul but afterwards  seeks  Allah's  
forgiveness,  he will find Allah  Oft-Forgiving,  Most  Merciful."  (An-Nisa  110)
L*.*>- J I jyAS ’ 4jj| 4l)l jSL
Allah  Almighty  further  says: "Celebrate  the Praises  of your  Lord,  and pray for
His Forgiveness:  for He is Oft-Returning  (in Grace  and Mercy)."  (An-Nasr  3)
^ 0 Mj] 0 jAjcSm lj d-bj JLo-^r  &
He Almighty  also says: "and who pray for forgiveness  in the early hours  of the 
morning."  (A1 Imran  17)
■The Messenger  of Allah ‘‘Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him” 
frequently  said: Exalted  be You O Allah  with Your  Praises  (I exalt  You):  O Allah!  
Forgive  for me: You aremost
Oft-Returning  (in repentance  and grace), Most


Page 604:
602 The quarter  of the acts of worship
Merciful."  It is narrated  that the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  
be upon  him” said: "He,  who prays  for Allah's  Forgiveness  most  frequentiy,  Allah  
Almighty  makes  for him a relief from every distress,  and a way out of every  
difficulty,  and gives him sustenance  from sources  which  he expects  not." the 
Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him” further  said:  
"Verily,  I pray for Allah's  Forgiveness,  and turn to Him in repentance  seventy  
times  per day" in spite of the fact that Allah  Almighty  forgave  for him all of his 
(the Prophet ’s) earlier  and later sins.
The Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him” said: "I 
feel as if the stain of the (ill) which  I might  do is on my heart so much  that I 
pray for Allah's  Forgiveness  one hundred  times per day." the Messenger  of 
Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him” said: "He, who says thrice  
when  he goes to bed: 'I pray for the Forgiveness  of Allah  Almighty,  other  than  
Whom  there is no god, Ever-Living,  Self-Subsisting,  Eternal,  and I turn in 
repentance  to Him' all of his sins are forgiven  for him by Allah  Almighty  even  
though  as much as is the foam of the sea, as numerous  as is equal to the 
number  of the sands  of the mountain,  as countless  as the number  of the leaves  
of the trees,  and as inestimable  as is the number  of the days of (the lifetime  of) 
this world"  and the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon  
him” said according  to another  version:  "He, who says so, all of his sins will be 
forgiven  for him, even though  (they included  the major  sin that) he fled away  
from  the batdefield."
It is narrated  on the authority  of Hudhaifah  that he said: I used to speak  
harshly  to my family,  thereupon  I said: "O Messenger  of Allah!  I fear lest my 
harsh  tongue  would  lead me to the fire (of Hell)."  On that the Messenger  of 
Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him” said: "Then,  where  are you 
from praying for Allah's Forgiveness?  No doubt, I pray for Allah's  
Forgiveness  one hundred  times  per day." A'ishah  "Allah  be pleased  with her"  
said: the Messenger  of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him” said to 
me: "If you commit  a minor  sin, pray for Allah's  Forgiveness,  and turn to Him  
in repentance,  for indeed,  to repent  from a sin is to show  regret  and pray for 
forgiveness."
The Messenger  of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him” used to say 
in his prayer  for forgiveness:  "O Allah!  forgive  for me my faults and ignorance,  
my indulgence  in the matter  of my (religion),  and (forgive  for me) what  you know  
of me better  than me. O Allah, forgive  for me (my sins which  I committed)  
seriously  or otherwise  (and which  I committed)  inadvertendy  and deliberately.  All 
these  (faults)  are in me. O Allah,  grant  me forgiveness  from the fault which  I did 
in haste or deferred,  which  I committed  in privacy  or in public  and which  You  
know  better  than me. You are the First and the Last,  Who  put forward  and bring  
backward  (whomever  You please),  and over  all things  You are Omnipotent."
It is narrated  (by Abu Dawud  in his Sunan)  on the authority  of Ali Ibn Abu  
Talib that he said: Whenever  I heard a Hadith  from the Messenger  of Allah  
“Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him”, I would  benefit  from  whatever  Allah


Page 605:
Book  nine: Celebrations  and invocations  
willed of it, and whenever  I heard a narration  from someone  else which he 
attributed  to him, I should  ask him to take oath (that it is really said by the 
Messenger  of Allah  “Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him”), and whenever  he 
took oath to that, I would  believe  him. Abu Bakr narrated  to me, and of course,  
Abu Bakr has told the truth, that he heard the Messenger  of Allah “Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him” having  said: “There  is no man who commits  a 
sin, then offers ablution  perfecdy,  performs  a two-rak ’ah prayer,  (Mis'ar  said:  
offers  prayer)  and then asks for Allah's  forgiveness,  but that Allah  Almighty  will 
forgive  him.” Then, he recited  Allah's  saying:  “And those who, having  done  
something  to be ashamed  of, or wronged  their  own souls,  earnesdy  bring  Allah  to 
mind, and ask for forgiveness  for their sins; and who can forgive  sins except  
Allah?  And are never  obsdnate  in persisdng  knowingly  (in the wrong)  they have  
done. ” (A1 Imran  135)
<U)I SfJ 1 jl Ijlx3 15]
It is narrated  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that the Messenger  of Allah  
“Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him” said: "If a servant  commits  a sin, a 
black mark emerges  in his heart: if he turns (to Allah) in repentance,  gives up 
(that sin) and prays for Allah's  Forgiveness,  his heart  will be polished  (and thus it 
will be removed),  and if he increases  (in his sin) it will grow so much until it 
covers  his heart.  This is, however,  the stain (of the evil) which  accumulates  on his 
heart  in accordance  with the statement  of Allah  Almighty:  "By no means!  But on 
their  hearts  is the stain of the (ill) which  they do!""  (Al-Mutaffifm  14)603
4.0 0 ^ b* Ob 'S> ^ ^
It is narrated  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  "Allah  be pleased  with him"  
that the Messenger  of Allah “Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him” said:  
"Verily,  Allah  Almighty  raises  a servant  to a higher  degree  in the Garden,  which  
him to ask: "O Lord! From which has this come?"  Allah then savs: prompts
"From  your offspring's  prayer  for forgiveness  for you." It is narrated  on the 
authority  of A'ishah  that the Messenger  of Allah “Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon him” said: "O Allah!  make me of those  whose  habit  is to rejoice  whenever  
they do good,  and pray for forgiveness  whenever  they do evil."
It is further  narrated  that the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and 
peace be upon him” said: "If a servant  commits  a sin and then he says: "O 
Allah!  forgive  for me", Allah  Almighty  says: "My servant  committed  a sin, and 
then he came to know  that he has a Lord  Who punishes  with because  of sins 
(if He so likes),  as well as He forgives  the sins (if He so likes):  O My servant!  
Do what you will, for I've forgiven  for you." According  to another  narration  
the Messenger  of Allah  “Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him” said: "By no 
means  does he who prays for forgiveness  (belong  to those who) persist  (in 
committing  sins),  even though  he returns  to it (as much  as) seventy  times  per 
day."


Page 606:
604 The quarter  of the acts of worship
It is narrated  that the Messenger  of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  
him” said: "A man who has never  done good cast a glance  at the sky and said:  
'Verily,  I have a Lord (Who  forgives  sins): O Lord!  Forgive  for me (my sins)!'  on 
that Allah  Almighty  said: "I've forgiven  for you'."  the Messenger  of Ml  ah “Allah ’s 
blessing  and peace  be upon  him” said (according  to another  narration):  "He,  who  
commits  a sin and then comes  to know  that Allah  Almighty  has seen him (for He 
is All-Seeing,  All-Knowing),  his sin will be then forgiven  for him (by Allah)  even  
though  he asks naught  for forgiveness."
The Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him” said 
(according  to a certain  narration):  "Allah  Almighty  says: 'O My servants!  All of 
you are sinful  barring  whomever  I have exempted:  so, pray for My Forgiveness,  
perchance  I shall forgive  for you; and he, who comes  to know  that 1 have the 
power  to forgive  for him, surely, I shall forgive  for him, and I do not care  
(whatever  his sins might  be)'."  the Messenger  of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  
be upon him” said: "He, who says: 'Glorified  be You (O Mlah)!  I've wronged  
myself:  so, forgive  for me, since none barring  You could forgive  the sins (for 
whomever  You please)',  his sins will be forgiven  for him even though  as much  as 
is the footsteps  of the ants."
It is narrated  that the best prayer  of forgiveness  goes as follows:  " O Allah!  
You are my lord other  than Whom  there is no God. You have created  me; and 
I'm your slave. I am keeping  on your treaty  and expecting  for your promise  as 
possible  as it could  be. I am seeking  refuge  with you from the evil of what  I have  
made.  I am confessing  of your blessings  your have bestowed  upon  me. I am also 
confessing  of my sin. Indeed,  I've wronged  myself  and confessed  of my sin: So, 
forgive  for me such of my sins as I committed  earlier  and later! None  but you 
could  forgive  all of the sins.”
As far as the sayings  and traditions,  a mention  might be made of the 
following:
According  to Khalid  Ibn Ma'dan:  Allah  Almighty  says: "Such  of My servants  
as are the dearest  to Me are those who love each other  with My Love,  whose  
hearts  are attached  to the mosques,  who always  pray for forgiveness  at the early  
dawn:  it is those  whom  (I love so much  that) if I like to punish  the inhabitants  
of the earth,  I remember  them,  and thus I leave them  and keep the punishment  
far away  from  them".  According  to Qatadah:  "Verily,  the Holy  Qur'an  leads  you 
to both your ailment  as well as your medicine  (to get cured):  as for your  
ailment,  it is such of sins (as you commit);  and as for your medicine,  it is your  
prayer for forgiveness."  According  to Ali "Allah be pleased  with him": "I 
wonder  at him who is ruined  (because  of his sins) in spite of the fact that he has 
salvation."  It was said to him: "What is it?" he said: "The prayer for 
forgiveness."  He used to say: "Allah  Mmighty  has not inspired  anyone  of His 
servants  (the power)  to pray for forgiveness  (from  his sins) and His Plan is to 
punish  him."
According  to Al-Fudail:  "The interpretation  of the servant's  statement  'I pray  
for Allah's  Forgiveness'  is 'O Allah!  rescue  me (from  my sins)'."  According  to one


Page 607:
Book  nine:  Celebrations  and invocations  
of the learned  men: "The servant  is between  (commitdng)  a sin and (receiving)  a 
blessing,  and nothing  is fitting  for both but to prayer  for forgiveness  (from  the 
sin), and praise  (Allah Almighty  for His blessing)."  According  to Ar-Rabie  Ibn 
Khaithamah:  "None  of you should  say 'I pray for Allah's  Forgiveness  and turn to 
Him in repentance'  lest this (which  he says) might  turn to be a sin and a lie if he 
does not prove  true to it; but rather  let anyone  say: 'O Allah!  forgive  for me, and 
turn to me in repentance'."
According  to Al-Fudail:  "The prayer  for forgiveness  without  giving  up the 
sin is the repentance  of the liars."  According  to Rabi'ah  Al-Adawiyyah:  "Our  
prayer  of forgiveness  is in need to be performed  so much."  According  to a 
wise man: "He, who makes  his prayer  for forgiveness  prior to his showing  
regret  (for his sins), does,  indeed,  scoff  at Allah Almighty  whereas  he knows  
not." A desert  Arab who was hanging  in the curtains  of the Ka'bah  was heard as 
saying: "O Allah! my prayer for Your Forgiveness,  with my persistence  (in 
committing  sins) is surely  out of vileness,  and leaving  prayer  for Your Forgiveness,  
with my knowledge  of the liberty  of Your  Pardon  is out of my failure.  How  much  do 
You (O Allah)  become  lovable  to me with Your  blessings  upon  me even though  You  
are not in need of me, and how much  do I become  hateful  to You because  of my 
sins even though  Pm in need of You. O (Allah)  Who fulfills  His Promise  whenever  
He makes  Promise,  and Who forgives  whenever  He threatens:  include  the major  
crime  of me under  the umbrella  of Your  Great  Pardon:  O (Allah)  Most  Merciful  of 
those  who show  mercy."
According  to Abu Abdullah  Al-Warraq:  "If you have as much sins as is the 
number  of the drops  (of rain) and the foam of the sea, they will be erased  from  
you once you supplicate  Allah Almighty  with the following  supplication,  Allah  
Willing: 'O Allah! I pray for Your Forgiveness  from each sin from which I 
repented  to You and then to which  I've returned  once again;  and I pray for Your  
Forgiveness  from each promise  I made to you of myself  but I've not fulfilled  to 
You; and I pray for Your  Forgiveness  from each deed by which  I intended  only  
Your  Countenance,  but in which  others  than You have been mixed;  and I pray  
for Your  Forgiveness  from each blessing  You bestowed  upon me, and with the 
help of which  I've disobeyed  You; and I pray for Your Forgiveness  O (Allah)  
Who has knowledge  of both the unseen  and of what  is visible  from each sin I've 
committed  during  the light of the day or the darkness  of the night, in the 
presence  of an assembly  or in seclusion,  in secrecy  or in public:  O (Allah)  Most  
Forbearing."  It is said that this supplication  was Adam's  and Al-Khadir's  prayer  
of forgiveness  "Peace  be upon  both".605
CHAPTER  THREE:  ON SOME  HANDED  DOWN  SUPPLICATIONS  WHOSE  
TRANSMITTERS  ARE KNOWN
Such Of Supplications  As With Which  It Is Desirable  For One To 
Supplicate  Every  Morning  And Evening,  And Following  Every
(Obligatory)  Prayer
A mention  might  be made  here of the following  supplications:


Page 608:
606 --------------------------------------------------  The quarter  of the acts of worship
The Supplication  Of The Messenger  Of Allah  "Allah's  
Blessing  And Peace  Be Upon  Him"  Following  The Two-Rak ’ah
Prayer  Prior  To Fajr:
In this connection,  it is narrated  on the authority  of Ibn Abbas  "Allah  be 
pleased  with both" that he said: Once,  Al-Abbas  sent me to the Messenger  of 
Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him” and I came to him in the 
evening,  and he was in the house  of my maternal  aunt Maimunah  (who was his 
wife).  At night,  he got up to offer (supererogatory)  prayers,  and when  he offered  
the two-rak ’ah prayer  prior to Fajr he said: "O Allah! I ask You to provide  me 
with mercy  from You therewith  to guide my (mind  and) heart,  unite my good  
merits,  and gather  my scattered  things,  avert afflictions  from me, set right my 
religion,  secure  my absence,  raise up my presence,  purify  my deed, make  bright  
my face, lead me to the right path, protect  me from every  kind of evil. O Allah!  
give me true faith and certainty  after which there will be no infidelity,  and 
(provide  me with) mercy,  therewith  I attain the honour  of Your Glory and 
Majesty  in this world  and in the hereafter.  O Allah!  I ask you to help me attain  
success  at the time of judgement,  (to raise  me up to) the ranks  of the martyrs,  and 
the living  of the happy  ones, to emerge  victory  over the enemies,  and get the 
company  of the Prophets.  O Allah! I offer my needs to You, in spite of the 
weakness  of my mind, the lack of my resourcefulness,  and the shortage  of my 
deeds,  and my neediness  to Your  Mercy:  I ask You O (Allah)  Who  suffices  for all 
matters,  and cures the breasts  (of all diseases),  to save me, as well as You save  
(Your  servants  from the dangers  of) the different  oceans,  from the torment  of 
the blazing  fire and from the call of destruction,  and from the affliction  of the 
graves.  O Allah!  I desire  to You and ask You O Allah,  Lord  of the worlds,  to give  
me that of which  my mind runs short,  that which  my deed proves  too weak to 
acquire,  and that which  my intention  and ambition  fail to attain,  of such of good  
as You have promised  to give anyone  of Your servants,  or of such of good as 
You are going  to give anyone  of Your Creatures.  O Allah!  make us guides  and 
righdy-guided,  and not straying  nor misleading,  who wage war against  Your  
enemies,  and make  peace  with Your  devotees,  who love,  with Your  Love,  such of 
Your  creatures  as obeys  You, and become  enemies,  with Your enmity,  such of 
Your  creatures  as opposes  You. O Allah!  this is our supplication,  and it is up to 
You to answer  it, and this is our effort,  and on you we put our trust;  and we all 
are to Allah,  to Whom  we shall return;  and there is neither  might  nor power  but 
with Allah, Most High, Most Great,  Lord of strong  rope (of faith) and well-  
directed  matter  (of religion):  I ask You to give me security  on the Day of the 
Threat  (i.e. the Day of Judgement),  and to admit  me to the Garden  on the Day  
of Eternity,  in the company  of Your nearest  devotees  and martyrs,  and those  
who used to perform  bowings  and prostrations  again and again (in their  
prayers),  who always  fulfill their pledges:  You are Oft-Merciful,  Full of loving


Page 609:
Book  nine: Celebrations  and invocations  
kindness,  Who  always  do what  You will. Glorified  be He, Who  is dressed  in and 
speaks  with power  and honour!  Glorified  be He, Who shows kindness  and 
generosity  (towards  His servants)  with His Glory!  Glorified  be He, to Whom  
only glory  is fitting!  Glorified  be He, Lord of Bounty  and Grace!  Glorified  be 
He, Lord of Power,  Honour  and Majesty!  Glorified  be He, Who takes account  
of all things  with His Knowledge!  O Allah!  make  light in my heart,  light in my 
grave, light in my hearing,  light in my seeing,  light in my hair, light in my 
complexion,  light  in my flesh,  light in my blood,  light in my bone,  light  in front  
of me, light on my back,  light on my right side, light on my left side, light over  
me, light underneath  me! O Allah! Increase  me in light, grant me light, and 
make  light for me!"
The Supplication  Of A'ishah  "Allah  Be Pleased  With Her"
The Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him” said to 
A'ishah  "Allah  be pleased  with her": "Adhere  to such of the shortest  statements  
as have the widest  and complete  and comprehensive  meanings  (of supplication):  
"O Allah! I ask You of all of the good,  whatever  sooner  or later it might  be, 
whatever  known  or unknown  it might  be; and I seek refuge  with You from all 
evil, whatever  sooner  or later it might  be, whatever  known  or unknown  it might  
be; and I ask You to admit me to the Garden  and to help me with such of 
statements  and deeds  as draws  me close to it; and I seek refuge  with You from  
the fire (of Hell),  and from  such of statements  and deeds  as draws  me close  to it; 
and I ask You (to give me) from the good that which Your servant  and 
Messenger  Muhammad  "Peace  be upon him" has asked  You; and I seek refuge  
with You from such (of evil) as Your servant  and Messenger  Muhammad  has 
sought  refuge  with You;  and I ask You to make  me on the right  way in the end of 
such of Your  Judgements  as You decree  pertaining  to me: with Your  Mercy,  O 
(Allah),  Most  Merciful  of those  who show  mercy."
The Supplication  Of Fatimah  "Allah  Be Pleased  With Her"
The Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him” said to 
Fatimah  (his daughter):  "O Fatimah!  What does prevent  you from paying  
attention  to that which I'm going  to advise  you to do? Say: "O (Allah)  Ever-  
Living,  Self-Subsisting,  Eternal!  With Your Mercy do I seek relief: trust me 
naught  to myself  for (as short  as) the twinkling  of the eye, and set right all of my 
affairs."607
i
The Supplication  Of Abu Bakr  As-Siddiq  "Allah  
Be Pleased  With Him"
The Messenger  of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him” taught  Abu  
Bakr  As-Siddiq  "Allah  be pleased  with him" to say (by way of supplication):  "O 
Allah!  I ask You by virtue  of Muhammad,  Your  Prophet,  Abraham,  Your  Bosom  
Friend,  Moses,  whom  You saved (from  Pharaoh),  Jesus,  Your  Word  and Spirit,  
by virtue  of the Torah  (which  You sent down  upon)  Moses,  the Gospel  (which  
You sent down  upon)  Jesus,  the Psalms  (which  You sent down  upon)  David,  and


Page 610:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
the Criterion  (i.e. the Holy Qur'an  which  You revealed  to) Muhammad  "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon him, and upon all of them",  and by virtue  of each  
(item of) Divine  Revelation  You revealed,  and by virtue  of each judgement  You  
decree,  with each beggar  whom  You give, by virtue  of each wealthy  one You  
make  poor,  and each needy  whom  You make  independent,  and each straying  one 
whom  You guide to the right way; and I ask You by Your Name  which  You  
revealed  to Moses  "Peace  be upon  him";  and I ask You by Your  Name  therewith  
You spread  the livelihood  of Your  servants;  and I ask You by Your  Name  which  
You've  placed  on the earth therewith  it has become  firmly  constant;  and I ask 
You by Your Name  which  You've  placed  on 
been raised high independendy;  and I ask You by Your Name  which  You've  
placed  on the mountains  therewith  they have become  firm; and I ask You by 
Your  Name  therewith  Your  Throne  (of Majesty)  has been raised  independendy;  
and I ask You by Your Name,  the Purity  and Pure, the One (and Only),  the 
Eternal,  Absolute,  the Odd (which  is one) which  is revealed  in Your  Book,  from  
Your  Presence  of the evident  light; and I ask You by Your  Name  which  You've  
placed  on
the night therewith  it has become  dark; (I ask You) by Your Greatness,  Your  
Magnificence,  and by the Light of Your Bounteous  Countenance:  to bestow  
upon  me the sustenance  of the Qur'an  and the knowledge  thereof,  and to mix it 
with my flesh,  with my blood,  with my hearing,  with my seeing,  and to use my 
body  therewith,  by Your  Might  and Power,  for indeed,  there  is neither  might  nor 
power  but with You O (Allah)  Most  Merciful  of those  who show  mercy."
The Supplication  Of Buraidah  Al-Aslami  "Allah  
Be Pleased  With Him"608
the heavens  therewith  they have
the day therewith  it has become  light, and (which  You've  placed)  on
It is narrated  that the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  
him” said to Buraidah:  "O Buraidah!  Should  I not teach  you some  words,  that by 
which  if one intends  good  he should  learn them,  and he shall never  forget  them?"  
he said: "Yes O Messenger  of Allah."  he said: "Then  say: "O Allah! I'm very  
weak:  so, please,  bestow  upon  me power  by Your  Good  Pleasure,  and lead me to 
the good, and make (my faith in) Islam the furthest  point of my pleasure.  O 
Allah!  I'm week:  so, please,  provide  me with strength;  and I'm humble:  so, please,  
bestow  power  and honour  upon me; and I'm poor and needy:  so, please,  make  
independent  and free of want O (Allah)  Most Merciful  of those  who show me
mercy.
The Supplication  Of Qabisah  Ibn Al-Mukhariq
It is narrated  that he said to the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and 
peace be upon him”: "Teach  me some words  therewith  Allah Almighty  might  
benefit  me, seeing  that I've grown  very old and too powerless  to do many  things  
which  I used to do (when  I was still youthful  and strong)."  the Messenger  of 
Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him” Saj<\; "As far as your world  is 
concerned,  after  you offer  the Morning  prayer,  you might  say thrice:  'Glorified  be 
Allah,  with Whose  Praise  (I exalt Him);  Glorified  be Allah,  Most  Great;  there is 
neither  might  nor power  but with Ahah,  Most High, Most Great'.  If you say


Page 611:
Book  nine:  Celebrations  and invocations 609
them,  you will become  safe from all kinds  of anxiety,  leprosy,  and paralysis.  And  
as far as your hereafter  is concerned,  you might  say: 'O Allah!  bestow  upon  
guidance  from Your Presence,  and pour  
over meme
over me out of Your Bounty,  spread  
out of Your  Mercy,  and send down  upon me out of Your  Blessings."  
Then, the Messenger  of Allah “Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him” said:  
"Behold!  If a servant  comes  with them on the Day of Judgement  and he did not 
leave them (in the world),  four gates of the Garden  will be opened  to him, to 
enter  from  whichever  of them  he likes."
The Supplication  Of Abu Ad-Darda 1 "Allah  Be Pleased  With Him"
There was flaming  fire in the residence  where  Abu Ad-Darda'  was living  
thereupon  it was said to him: "Your  house  has been  in flames."  He said: "Allah  is 
not to do so (with my house)."  This was said to him thrice,  and in every  time,  he 
gave the same answer:  "Allah  is not to do so (with my house)."  Then,  a comer  
visited  him and said: "O Abu Ad-Darda'!  when the fire became  close to your  
house,  it was extinguished  (what is the reason?)"  He said: "I came to know  
that."  They  said: "However,  we do not know,  which  of your two statements  is 
more amazing!"  On that he said: "I heard the Messenger  of Allah “Allah's  
blessing  and peace be upon him'' having  said: "He, who says the following  
words  whether  at night  or during  the daylight,  nothing  will harm  him; and of a 
surety, I've said them." Those are: "O Allah! You are my Sustainer  and 
Cherisher:  there is no god (to be worshipped)  but You: I've put my trust in 
You, and You are the Lord of the Throne  (of Majesty),  Most Great.  There  is 
neither  might  nor power  but with Allah,  Most High,  Most Great.  What  Allah  
wills is, and what  Allah  wills naught  is not. I know,  with certainty,  that Allah  has 
power over all things, and that Allah encompasses  all things with His 
Knowledge,  and that He takes  account  of all things.  O Allah!  I seek refuge  with  
You from the evil of myself,  and from the evil of every  moving  creature  over  
whose  forelock  You have  grasp:  verily,  it is my Lord that is on a straight  path."
The Supplication  Of Abraham,  The Bosom  Friend  "Allah's  Blessing
And Peace  Be Upon  Him"
He used to say whenever  morning  entered  upon him: "O Allah!  this is a new  
creature:  open it to me with my obedience  to You, and conclude  it for me with  
Your forgiveness  for me, and Your Good Pleasure  with me; and sustain  me 
therein  with a good deed to be accepted,  purified,  multiplied  by You;  and forgive  
for me such of evil deeds as I do therein:  verily,  You are Oft-Forgiving,  Most  
Merciful,  Full of Loving-Kindness,  Most Generous."  Furthermore,  the 
Messenger  of Allah “Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him” said: "He, who  
supplicates  with this supplication  whenever  morning  comes upon him, has, 
indeed,  fulfilled  such of thanks  as due upon  him during  his day (to Allah)."
The Supplication  Of Jesus "Peace  Be Upon  Him"
He used to say: "O Allah!  I've become  in a state in which  I could  hardly  avert  
what  I dislike  from  me, or even  get benefit  from  what  I like and hope,  seeing  that


Page 612:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
the (disposal  of the) matter  has turned  to be in the hand of someone  else other  
than me, and I've become  in pledge  of my deed,  in such a way that there is no 
poorer  than me. O Allah!  make  You not my enemy  rejoice  over my misfortune,  
nor You pain my friend  because  of my distress,  and make  not my disaster  in my 
religion,  and make not the (vanities  and delights  of) this world my greatest  
concern,  and direct not over me him who is merciless  towards  me: O (Allah)  
Ever-Living,  Self-Subsisting,  Eternal."
The Supplication  Of AI-Khadir  "Peace  Be Upon  Him"
It is said that whenever  Al-Khadir  and Elias "Peace  be upon  them"  met every  
year, they will not leave  each other  but after saying  the following  words:  "In the 
Name  of Allah;  Allah's  will (be done);  there is no power  but with Allah;  Allah's  
will (be done);  every  blessing  is from Allah;  Allah's  will (be done);  all good is in 
the hand of Allah;  Allah's  will (be done);  none could  avert evil but Allah."  He, 
who says it thrice  whenever  morning  comes  upon  him, will be safe from falling  a 
victim  of burning,  sinking  and theft,  As Allah  Almighty  wills.
The Supplication  Of Ma'ruf  Al-Karkhi  "Allah  Be Pleased  With Him"
According  to Muhammad  Ibn Hassan:  Ma'ruf  Al-Karkhi  said to me: "Should  I 
not teach  you ten words:  five for this world  and five for the hereafter?  He, who  
supplicates  Allah  Almighty  with them,  will find Allah  Almighty  therein."  I said to 
him: "Then,  write them down  to me." He said: "No, but let me recite to you 
repeatedly  in the same way as Bakr Ibn Khamis  recited  them to me repeatedly:  
Allah  suffices  me for (protector  of) my religion;  Allah  suffices  me for (protector  
of) my world;  Allah,  Most  Honoured  and Generous  suffices  me for (disposer  of) 
what  concerns  me; Allah,  Most  Forbearing,  Exalted  in Power  and Might  suffices  
me for (my protector  against)  him who wrongs  me; Allah,  Exalted  in Strength  
suffices  me for (my protector  from)  him who makes  evil plots against  me; Allah,  
Most  Merciful  suffices  me (for establishing  me in faith) at the moment  of death;  
Allah,  Most Compassionate  suffices  me (for establishing  me in strength)  at the 
time of asking  me in the grave;  Allah,  Most  Honoured  and Generous  suffices  me 
(for my helper)  at the time of reckoning;  Allah, the Knower  of the finest  
mysteries  suffices  me (for making  heavy  my good deeds)  at the time of (putting  
one's deeds in the) scales of balance;  Allah, Who has power  over all things  
suffices  me (for my guide)  at the (time of crossing  the) path; Allah suffices  me: 
there  is no god (to be worshipped)  but He, on Whom  do I put my trust,  and it is 
He that is the Lord  of the Throne  (of Majesty),  Most  Great."
It is narrated  on the authority  of Abu Ad-Darda'  "Allah  be pleased  with him"  
that he said: "He, who recites  seven  times everyday:  " But if they turn away,  say: 
'Allah  suffices  me; there  is no god but He: on Him is my trust: He is the Lord of 
the Throne  (of Glory),  Supreme""  (At-Tawbah  129)
Allah  Almighty  suffices  him (for disposer  of) all of his affairs  of the hereafter,  
no matter  true or false he might  be."610


Page 613:
Book  nine:  Celebrations  and invocations  -------------------------
The Supplication  Of Utbah  Al-Ghulam
After  his death,  he was seen in a dream  in which  he said: I entered  the Garden  
by virtue  of the following  words:  "O Allah,  Who guides  the straying,  bestows  
Mercy  upon  the sinful,  and removes  the difficulties  of those  who are in difficulty:  
bestow  mercy  upon Your servant  who is under  a great risk (of punishment)  as 
well as upon all of the Muslims,  and make us in the company  of the good  
virtuous,  upon whom  You bestow  sustenance  and blessing,  from amongst  the 
Prophets,  the truly faithful  believers,  the martyrs  and the righteous:  Amen  O 
(Allah)  Sustainer  and Cherisher  of the worlds."
The Supplication  Of Adam  "Peace  Be Upon  Him"
It is narrated  on the authority  of A'ishah  that she said: When  Allah  Almighty  
intended  to turn in repentance  to Adam  "Peace  be upon  him" He caused  him to 
perform  a seven-round  circumambulation  round  the House,  and at that time it 
had not been constructed  yet, and rather  it was no more than a red hill, after  
which  he stood and offered  a two-rak'ah  prayer  and said: "O Allah!  You know  
(what  I do in) secrecy  and (what  I do in) public:  so, please,  accept  my apology;  
and You know  my need: so, please,  give me what  I ask for; and You know  what  
lurks  in myself:  so, please,  forgive  for me my sins. O Allah!  I ask you to grant  me 
an assured  belief  which  penetrates  my heart,  and a true certainty  (of faith) which  
causes  me to know  that nothing  shall befall me but that which  You've  decreed  
upon me, and (I also ask You to endow  me with) pleasure  with what You've  
assigned  to me: O (Allah)  Lord of Majesty,  Glory  and Honour."  The result  was 
that Allah  Almighty  revealed  to him that "I've forgiven  for you (your  sins); and 
none  of your offspring  comes  to invoke  me with the same  invocation  with which  
you invoked  me but that I shall forgive  for him, remove  his anxieties  and 
distresses  from him, deprive  him of poverty  and neediness,  cause him to profit  
from behind  each trader,  and the world to come to him in willing  submission  
even  if he has no desire  for it."
The Supplication  Of Ali Ibn Abu Talib "Allah  Be Pleased  With Him"
It is narrated  on the authority  of Ali from the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s 
blessing  and peace  be upon him” that he said: "Verily,  Allah  Almighty  glorifies  
Himself  everyday  saying:  'Verily,  I'm Allah,  the Sustainer  and Cherisher  of the 
worlds.  Verily,  I'm Allah,  and there is no god (to be worshipped)  other than I, 
Ever-Living,  Self-Subsisting,  Eternal.  I'm Allah, and there is no god (to be 
worshipped)  but I, Most  High,  Most  Great.  Verily,  I'm Allah,  and there  is no god 
(to be worshipped)  but I, Who begets  not, nor is He begotten.  Verily,  I'm Allah,  
and there is no god (to be worshipped)  but I, who plots out (sins) and forgives  
(again  and again).  Verily,  I'm Allah,  and there  is no god (to be worshipped)  but I, 
Who  begins  everything,  and to Me everything  shall return,  Exalted  in Power,  Full 
of Wisdom,  Most Gracious,  Most  Merciful,  the Lord and Master  of the Day of 
Judgement,  the Creator  of both good  and evil, Creator  of both Garden  and Hell,  
the One and Only,  the Unique,  eternal,  Absolute,  Who has no consort,  nor son, 
the Unique,  the Odd (which  is one),  Who has knowledge  of the unseen  and that611


Page 614:
612 The quarter  of the acts of worship
which is visible,  The Sovereign,  The Holy One, The Source  Of Peace And  
Perfection,  The Guardian  Of Faith And Security,  The Preserver  Of Safety,  The  
Exalted  In Might,  The Compeller,  The Supreme,  The Creator,  The Evolver,  The  
Bestower  Of Forms,  The Most Magnificent,  Most Splendid,  The Omnipotent,  
the Irresistible,  Most Forbearing,  Most Honoured  and Generous,  Who is most  
fitting  to receive  gratitude  and Glory,  Who has best knowledge  of the deepest  
secrets  and what is more  hidden,  Who  has power  (over  all things),  Who bestows  
sustenance  (upon His servants),  Who is beyond  creation  and creatures."  He 
mentioned  before  each word  of those  (die statement)  'Verily,  I'm Allah,  and there  
is no god (to be worshipped)  than I* as we related  in the first portion:  He, who  
supplicates  with those  Names,  let him say: "Verily,  it is You that is Allah,  other  
than Whom  there is no god (to be worshipped)  Such and Such. He, who  
supplicate  with those (Names)  will be enlisted  among  the devout  performers  of 
prostrations  (in their prayers)  again and again,  who will be (in the hereafter)  the 
neighbours  of Muhammad,  Abraham,  Moses,  Jesus, and all of the Prophets  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" in the abode  of Majesty  and Glory,  and 
he will further  receive,  in this world,  the reward  of the worshippers  in both the 
heavens  and the earths:  and Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  Muhammad  and 
upon  even*  wTeil-chosen  servant.
The Supplications  And Celebrations  Of Sulaiman  Ibn AI-Mu'tamir  
At-Taimi  "Allah  Be Pleased  With Him"i
It is narrated  that Yunus  Ibn Ubaid  saw in a dream  a man of those  who had 
been killed as martyrs  in the land of the Romans,  whom  he asked:  "What  is the 
best deed you've  seen?"  he said: "I've seen the position  of the celebrations  of 
Sulaiman  Ibn Al-Mu'tamir  they occupy  close  to the Presence  of Allah  Almighty."  
They  go as follows:  "Glory  be to Allah;  Praise  be to Allah;  there  is no god (to be 
worshipped)  but Allah;  Allah  is Greater;  and there  is neither  might  nor power  but 
wnth Allah,  Most  High,  Most  Great  as abundant  as is the number  of what He has 
created  and what  He is going  to create,  as heavy  as is the weight  of what He has 
created  and what  He is going  to create,  as large  as to fill what  He has created  and 
what  He is going  to create,  as much  as to fill His heavens  and earths,  and the like 
of all of that and manifold  the like of all of that besides,  as plentiful  as is the 
number  of His creatures,  as heavy  as is the weight  of His Throne  (of Majesty),  as 
great  as is the furthest  point  of His Mercy,  as endless  as is the ink of His Speech,  
as far-reaching  as to attain  His Good  Pleasure  until He becomes  well-pleased,  and 
even  if He is pleased,  as numerous  as is the number  of the celebrations  therewith  
all of His creatures  have remembered  Him across  the past time, and therewith  
they are going to remember  Him in the remaining  time (until the Day of 
Judgement),  every year, month,  week,  day, night, hour among  the hours,  every  
gulp of air and breath  among  the breaths,  every  generation,  from generation  to 
generation  of those  of this world  and those  of the hereafter,  and much  more  than  
that,  whose  beginning  never  ceases,  and whose  end is never  exhaustible."i
;
:
i


Page 615:
Book  nine:  Celebrations  and invocations  --------------------------------
The Supplication  Of Ibrahim  Ibn Adham  "Allah  
Be Pleased  With Him"
It is narrated  on the authority  of his servant,  Ibrahim  Ibn Bashshar  that he 
said: This supplication  is to be said in the morning  and evening  of every Friday,  
and it goes as follows:  "Welcome  to the day of more  (rewards),  the new morning,  
the scribe  and the witness:  this day of ours is a day of festival.  Write  down  for us 
what we are to say: In the Name  of Allah,  Praiseworthy,  Full of Majesty,  Most  
Lofty,  Full of Loving-Kindness,  Who always  does with His creatures  what He 
wills. The morning  has come upon me while I'm believing  in Allah Almighty,  
having  trust  in His Meeting,  confessing  of His reasoning  (about  Himself),  praying  
for forgiving  of my sins, submitting  to the Lordship  of Allah,  rejecting  any god 
(to be worshipped)  other  than Allah  Almighty,  dependent  upon  Allah  Almighty,  
putdng  my trust on Allah Almighty,  turning  to Allah (in service).  I make Allah,  
His angels,  Prophets,  Messengers,  the carriers  of His Throne  (of Majesty),  those  
He has created,  and those  He is going  to create,  witnesses  that (I bear testimony  
that) He is Allah,  other  than Whom  there  is no god (to be worshipped),  the One  
and Only,  with Whom  there is no partner;  and that Muhammad  is His servant  
and Messenger;  that the Garden  is a fact, that the fire (of Hell) is a fact, that the 
Fount-Lake  (of the Prophet  on the Day of Judgement)  is a fact, that the 
intercession  (of Muhammad)  is a fact, both Munkar  and Nakir  are a fact, Your  
Promise  (of the Garden)  is a fact and Your  Threat  (of the fire of Hell) is a fact,  
and Meeting  You is a fact; and that the Hour  (of  Judgement)  will inevitably  come  
in which  there  is no doubt,  in which  Allah  Almighty  will raise such of dead as the 
graves  contain:  (I bear testimony  that) I live on that (faith)  on which  I die, and on 
which  I shall be resurrected,  Allah Willing.  O Allah!  Verily,  You are my Lord,  
other  than Whom  there is no God. You have created  me; and I'm your slave. I 
am keeping  on your treaty  and expecting  for your promise  as possible  as it could  
be. I am seeking  refuge  with you O Allah  from  the evil of what I have made,  and 
from the evil of such of things  as has evil. O Allah!  Indeed,  I've wronged  myself:  
So, forgive  for me my sins! None  but you could  forgive  all of the sins, and guide  
me to the best of manners,  for none barring  You could guide to the best of 
manners,  and avert  from  me the worst  of them,  for none  barring  You could  avert  
the best of manners.  I'm responding  to Your  Call; all happiness  be in Your  hand;  
and all good be in Your Hand.  I'm to You, and I shall return  to You. I pray for 
Your  Forgiveness,  and turn to You in repentance.  I have faith, O Allah,  in the 
Messenger  whom  You have sent, and I have faith, O Allah,  in the Book  which  
You have revealed  (upon  Your Messenger);  and Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon Muhammad,  the unlettered  Prophet,  and upon his family,  as much as it 
could  be, at the conclusion  and in the commencement  of my speech,  and (Allah's  
blessing  and peace be) upon all of His Prophets  and Messengers:  Amen,  O 
(Allah)  Sustainer  and Cherisher  of the worlds.  O Allah! let's come upon the 
Fount-Lake  of Muhammad,  and cause  us to have a blessed  fresh satisfying  drink613


Page 616:
614 The quarter  of the acts of worship
from his cup, after which  we will never become  thirsty,  and gather  us in his 
company,  without  being  disgraced,  nor breaking  our covenant,  nor doubting,  nor 
being  afflicted,  nor of those  upon  whom  (Allah's)  Wrath  falls, nor of those  who  
go astray.  O Allah!  protect  me from the afflictions  of this world,  and help me do 
that which  You like with which  You are well-pleased,  and set right all of my 
affairs,  and establish  me in strength  with the firm statement  in this world  of life 
and in the hereafter,  and cause  me not to stray,  even though  I'm unjust.  Glorified  
be You! Glorified  be You O (Allah)  Most High, Most Great,  O Evolver,  O 
Most  Merciful,  O Exalted  in Power  and Might,  O Compelled  Glorified  be He, 
Whose  Glories  the heavens  with its shades  celebrate,  and Glorified  be He, 
Whose  Glories  the oceans  with their waves celebrate,  and Glorified  be He, 
Whose  Glories  the mountains  with their echoes  celebrate,  and Glorified  be He, 
Whose  Glories  the whales  with their language  celebrate,  and Glorified  be He, 
Whose  Glories  the stars in the sky with tier constellations  celebrate,  and 
Glorified  be He, Whose  Glories  the trees with their roots and fruits celebrate,  
and Glorified  be He, Whose  Glories  the seven heavens  and the seven  earths,  
with all of that which  is in and on them,  and Glorified  be He, Whose  Glories  
everything  of His creatures  celebrates.  Blessed  and Exalted  be You (O Allah)!  
glorified  be You! Glorified  be You O (Allah) Ever-Living,  Self-Subsisting,  
Eternal,  O (Allah)  All-Knowing,  Most Forbearing!  Glorified  be You! There  is 
no god (to be worshipped)  but You, the One and Only,  and with You there  is 
no partner:  it is You Who give life, and bring to death, and You are Ever-  
Living,  Who never die; in Your Hand is good,  and You have power  over all 
things."
CHAPTER  FOUR:  ON SOME  INVOCATIONS  HANDED  DOWN  FROM  THE  
PROPHET  AND  HIS COMPANIONS
Whose  narrators  are unknown,  and they are selected  from the anthologies  
compiled  by Abu  Talib  Al-Makki,  Ibn Khuzaimah,  and Ibn Mundhir
When  morning  comes  upon a follower  of the path, it is desirable  for him to 
have supplication,  the dearest  of his regular  divisions  in his sight, as we shall  
mention  later in the book  of Regular  Divisions.  If you are of the seekers  of the 
tilth of the hereafter,  and the followers  of the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s 
blessing  and peace be upon him” in his supplications,  you should  say in the 
commencement  of your supplications,  after your (obligatory)  prayers:  Exalted  be 
my Lord, Most High, Most Supreme,  Grantor  (of favours)  without  measure.  
There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah,  the One and Only, other than  
Whom  there  is no partner:  His is the dominion,  and to him be praise,  and He has 
power  over  all things."
Say also thrice:  "I've accepted  Allah as my Lord,  Islam  as my religion,  and 
Muhammad  "Peace  be upon  him" as (the last) Prophet."  Say too: "O Allah!  the 
Creator  of both the heavens  and the earth,  the Knower  of the unseen  and what  
is visible,  the Lord  and King  of all things:  I bear testimony  to the fact that there


Page 617:
Book  nine: Celebrations  and invocations  
is no god (to be worshipped)  but You. I seek refuge  with You from the evil of 
myself  and from the evil of Satan and his ascribing  others to Allah (in 
worship)."  Say too: "O Allah! I ask You to endow  me with forgiveness  and 
power  in my religion  and world,  my family  and property.  O Allah!  screen  my 
private  parts and remove  the causes  of my fear, and eliminate  my difficulties,  
and protect  me from my front,  from my back,  from my right side, from  my left 
side, and from above  me, and I seek refuge  with You from being  assassinated  
from underneath  me. O Allah!  do not make me feel secure  against  Your Plan,  
nor let me have friends  and protectors  other  than You, nor deprive  me of Your  
Screen,  nor cause me to forget  your remembrance,  nor make me one of the 
heedless."
You should  further  say thrice:  “O Allah!  You are my lord other  than Whom  
there is no God. You have created  me; and I'm your slave. I am keeping  on 
your treaty and expecting  for your promise  as possible  as it could be. I am 
seeking  refuge  with you from the evil of what  I have made.  I am confessing  of 
your blessings  your have bestowed  upon me. I am also confessing  of my sin. 
Indeed,  I've wronged  myself  and confessed  of my sin: So, forgive  for me such  
of my sins as I committed  earlier  and later! None  but you could forgive  all of 
the sins.”  Say thrice:  "O Allah!  endow  me with health  and power  in my body;  
endow  me with health  and power  in my hearing;  endow  me with health  and 
power  in my seeing:  there  is no god (to be worshipped)  but You."
You should say too: "O Allah! I ask You (to bestow  upon me) the 
satisfaction  after Your  Judgement,  the coolness  of living  after death,  and the 
pleasure  of looking  at Your Bounteous  Countenance,  longing  for Your  
Meeting,  with no harmful  adversity  nor misleading  affliction;  and I seek refuge  
with You from wronging  or being  wronged,  from transgressing  against  others  
or being a victim  of transgression,  or committing  a sin or mistake  which  is 
unpardonable  by You. O Allah!  I ask You to establish  me in strength  in the 
matter  (of religion),  and provide  me with firmness  in guidance,  and I ask You to 
help me be thankful  of Your  Blessing  and perfecdy  good  in Your  Service;  and I 
ask You (to grant me) a sound  and submissive  heart, a straight  figure,  a true 
speech,  an accepted  deed; and I ask You (to give me) of the good which  You  
know,  and I seek refuge  with You from the evil of what  You know;  and I pray  
for Your  Forgiveness  for such (of sins) as You know  well: Verily,  You know  (all 
things)  and I know  not, and You have full knowledge  of all that is hidden.
O Allah!  forgive  for me what Pve done earlier  and later, what I've done in 
secrecy  and what Pve done in public,  and what  You know  better  than me: it is 
You who bring  forward  and it is You who bring  backward  (what  You will), and 
You have power  over all things,  and You are witness  to what is hidden.  O 
Allah!  I ask You (to grant  me) faith which  never  wavers,  blessing  which  is never  
exhaustible,  the pleasure  of the eye which  is permanent,  and the company  of 
Your Prophet  Muhammad  "Peace  be upon him" in the highest  portion  of the 
Garden  of Eternity.  O Allah!  I ask You (to provide  me with) good  things  and 
(help me) do what  is good,  and leave  what  is shameful,  love the indigent.  I ask615


Page 618:
616 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
You (to help me) love You and love him who loves You, and love such of 
deeds as draws near unto Your Love; and (I ask You) to turn to me in 
repentance,  to forgive  for me, and to bestow  mercy  upon me, and to take me 
unto You (by death),  if You  intend  to put my people  to affliction,  without  being  
afflicted.
O Allah!  By virtue  of Your knowledge  of that which  is hidden  and unseen,  
and Your  Power  of creation,  make me live as long as life is good for me, and 
cause  me to die as long as death  is good  for me. I ask You (to help me) fear You  
in what is unseen  and what  is visible,  say the word of justice  in both states of 
pleasure  and anger,  stick to moderation  in both states of richness  and poverty,  
enjoy of the pleasure  of looking  at Your Bounteous  Countenance,  longing  for 
Your  Meeting;  and I seek  refuge  with  You from  a harmful  adversity  or misleading  
affliction.  O Allah! adorn  us with the adornment  of faith, and make us well-  
directed  guides.  O Allah!  assign  to us of fearing  You that therewith  You prevent  
us from  disobeying  You,  of Your  obedience  that therewith  You cause  us to attain  
Your Garden,  of the certainty  (of faith) that therewith  You make easy upon us 
the disasters  and adversities  of this world  and the hereafter.
O Allah!  fill our faces with shyness  of You, our hearts  with fear of You, and 
place  in ourselves  such of Your  Greatness  as therewith  You subjugate  our organs  
in Your service.  O Allah!  Make  Yourself  the dearest  to us of anything  else, and 
cause us to fear You most apart from anyone  else. O Allah! Cause the first 
portion  of this day of ours to be good,  its middle  portion  to be prosperity,  and its 
last portion  to be success.  O Allah! cause its first portion  to be a (source  of) 
mercy,  its middle  portion  to be a (source  of) blessing,  and its last portion  to be a 
(cause  of) honouring  and forgiveness.  Praise  be to Allah  that everything  becomes  
humble  before  His Greatness,  everything  becomes  submissive  to His Honour,  
and everything  becomes  subject  to His Dominion,  and everything  surrenders  to 
His Power;  and Praise  be to Allah  that everything  becomes  passive  to His Glory,  
that He demonstrates  everything  with His Wisdom,  and everything  becomes  little  
before  His Magnificence.
O Allah!  send  Your  Prayer  upon  Muhammad,  upon  the family  of Muhammad,  
upon the wives and offspring  of Muhammad,  and send Your Blessing  upon  
Muhammad,  upon the family of Muhammad,  the wives and offspring  of 
Muhammad,  in the same  way as You sent Your  Blessing  upon  Abraham  and the 
family  of Abraham  in the worlds:  You are Praiseworthy,  Most  Glorious.  O Allah!  
send Your  Prayer  upon  Muhammad,  Your  servant  and Prophet  and Messenger,  
the unlettered  Prophet,  Your  honest  Messenger,  and grant  him the praiseworthy  
station  which  You promised  him on the Day of Judgement.  O Allah!  make  us of 
Your  pious  devotees,  Your  prosperous  party,  and Your  good  servants,  and use us 
in what  makes  You well-pleased  with us, and help us do what  causes  You to love  
us, and dispose  of our affairs  in accordance  with the best of choice  You favour  
for us. (O Allah)  we ask You (to grant  us) the totalities,  beginnings  and endings


Page 619:
Book  nine:  Celebrations  and invocations
°f good,  and we seek refuge  with You from the totalities,  beginnings  and endings  
of evil.
O Allah!  by Your  Power  over  me, turn in repentance  to me for verily  You are 
Oft-Returning,  Most Merciful,  and by Your Forbearing  (and long-patience)  
me, forgive  me, for verily,  You are Oft-Forgiving,  Most  Forbearing;  and by Your  
Knowledge  of me, be kind to me, for indeed  You are Most Merciful  of those  
who show  mercy;  and by Your  Control  over  my self, let me have control  over  my 
own self, and direct  it not with evil against  me, for verily  You are the Sovereign,  
Compeller.  Glorified  be You O AJlah,  and with Your  Praise  (I exalt  You):  there  is 
no god (to be worshipped)  but You. I've done evil and wronged  myself:  forgive  
for me my sin, for You are my Lord  and none  barring  You could  forgive  the sins.
O Allah!  inspire  to me my guidance,  and protect  me against  the evil of my 
own self. O Allah!  bestow  upon me sustenance  from what  is lawful,  for which  
you punish  me naught,  and satisfy  me with such of sustenance  as You bestow  
upon  me, and use me therewith  in what  is good  which  You accept  from me. O 
Allah! I ask You (to provide  me with) forgiveness,  health  and power,  and to 
(endow  me with) the perfect  certainty  of faith,  and to confer  health  and power  
upon  me in this world  and the hereafter:  O (Allah)  Whom  the sins could  harm  
naught,  and forgiveness  decreases  nothing  from His (Dominion):  grant to me 
what harms  You naught,  and give to me what decreases  nothing  from Your  
(Dominion).  O (Allah)  our Lord! pour out on us patience  and constancy,  and 
take our souls unto You as Muslims  (who bow to Your Will)! You are my 
Friend  and Protector  in this world  and the hereafter:  take my soul onto You as 
a Muslim  (who  bow to Your  Will) and join me with the good righteous  (among  
Your servants).  You are our Friend  and Protector:  forgive  for us, and bestow  
mercy  upon us, for verily,  You are the best of those  who Forgive,  And ordain  
for us that which  is good,  in this life and in the Hereafter:  for we have turned  
unto  You.
O Our Lord!  In You do we trust, and to You do we turn in repentance:  to 
You is (our) final Goal. O Our Lord! Make us not a (test and) trial for the 
wrongdoers!  O Our Lord!  Make  us not a (test and) trial for the Unbelievers,  but 
forgive  us, our Lord!  For You are the Exalted  in Might,  the Wise.  O Our Lord!  
forgive  us our sins and anything  we may have done that transgressed  our duty:  
establish  our feet firmly,  and help us against  those that resist Faith. O Our  
Lord! Forgive  us, and our brethren  who came before  us into the Faith, and 
leave not, in our hearts,  rancour  (or sense of injury)  against  those who have  
believed.  Our Lord! You are indeed  Full of Kindness,  Most Merciful.  O Our  
Lord!  bestow  on us mercy  from  Yourself,  and dispose  of our affair  for us in the 
right  way!
O Our Lord! Give us good in this world and good in the Hereafter,  and 
defend  us from the torment  of the Fire! O Our Lord!  we have heard  the call of 
one calling  (us) to Faith, 'Believe  you in the Lord',  and we have believed.  Our617
on


Page 620:
618 The quarter  of the acts of worship
Lord!  forgive  us our sins, blot out from  us our iniquities,  and take to Yourself  our 
souls in the company  of the righteous.  O Our Lord! Grant  us what You did 
promise  unto us through  Your  Messengers,  and save us from shame  on the Day  
of Judgment;  for You never  break  Your  promise.  O Our Lord!  Condemn  us not 
if we forget  or fall into error;  our Lord! Lay not on us a burden  like that which  
You did lay on those  before  us; our Lord!  lay not on us a burden  greater  than we 
have strength  to bear. Blot out our sins, and grant  us forgiveness.  Have  mercy  on 
us. You are our Protector;  help us against  those  who stand  against  Faith.
O My Lord! bestow  on them your Mercy  even as they cherished  me in 
childhood.  (O my Lord) forgive  for the faithful  believing  men and women,  the 
Muslims  from  amongst  males  and females,  those  who are living  and those  who  
are dead among  them. O my Lord! Forgive  (for us our sins) and bestow  mercy  
(upon  us), and excuse  us for what You know (about  us): Verily,  You are Most  
Exalted  in Power  and Honour,  Most  Generous,  and You are the best Merciful  of 
those  who show  mercy,  and You are the best of those  who forgive;  and we all are 
to Allah,  to Whom  shall  we return;  and there  is neither  might  nor power  but with  
Allah,  Most  High,  Most  Great;  and Allah  suffices  us for the best disposer  (of our 
affairs);  and Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon Muhammad,  the Seal of the 
Prophet,  and upon  his family  and companions  as much,  numerous  and abundant  
as it could  be.
The Kinds  Of Seeking  Refuge  (With  Allah)  Handed  Down  From  The  
Prophet  "Peace  Be Upon  Him"
O Allah!  I seek refuge  with You from  being  given  to niggardliness,  and I seek  
refuge  with You from falling  a victim  of cowardice,  and I seek refuge  with You  
from being  sent back to the geriatric  age, and I seek refuge  with You from the 
affliction  of this world,  and I seek refuge  with You from the punishment  of the 
grave.  O Allah!  I seek refuge  with You from  having  a disposition  which  leads me 
to greediness,  and from  being  greedy  of that which  is not fitting  for one to covet,  
and from being covetous  whereas  there is nothing  to covet. O Allah! I seek  
refuge  with You from having  knowledge  which  is of no benefit,  from having  
heart which is not submissive  (to You in service),  from supplicating  with  
invocation  which  receives  no answer,  and from  a soul which  is never  satisfied.
O Allah!  I seek refuge  with You from (being  given  to) hunger:  how evil it 
is to lie with! And I seek refuge with You from (being vulnerable  to) 
treachery:  how evil intent  it is! O Allah!  I seek refuge  with You from being  
given to disability,  laziness,  niggardliness,  and decrepitude,  and from being  
sent back to the geriatric  age, and from  the affliction  of the Dajjal  and from  
the punishment  of the grave and the affliction  of both life and death. O 
Allah!  we ask You (to endow  us with) compassionate  hearts,  which  are given  to 
look to Allah,  devout  and returning  (to Allah)  in Your  Cause.  O Allah!  I ask You  
(to bestow  upon me) these which  affirm  Your Forgiveness  (for me), and these  
which  assure  Your  Mercy  (upon  me), the safety  and peace  from  every  sin, and the


Page 621:
Book  nine:  Celebrations  and invocations
benefit  from every  good,  the attainment  of the Garden,  and the salvation  from  
the fire (of Hell).
O Allah!  I seek refuge  with You from falling,  and I seek refuge  with You from  
being  given to anxiety,  and I seek refuge  with You from sinking,  burning,  and 
(falling  under)  ruins, and I seek refuge  with You from dying as fleeing  away  
(while  fighting)  in Your  Cause,  and I seek refuge  from dying  while  seeking  after  
(the vanities  and delights  of) this world.  O Allah!  I seek refuge  with You from  the 
evil of what I know  and from the evil of what I know  not. O Allah! keep  
away from what is shameful  of manners,  deeds, diseases  and inclinations.  O 
Allah!  I seek refuge  with You from the difficulty  of distress,  and the attainment  
of wretchedness,  the evil judgement  and the schadenfreude  of the enemies  
(because  of my misfortunes).
O Allah!  I seek refuge  with You from being  given  to infidelity,  from falling  in 
debt and poverty,  and I seek refuge  with You from the torment  of the (fire of) 
Hell, and I seek refuge  with You from the affliction  of the Dajjal.  O Allah!  I seek  
refuge  with You from  the evil of my hearing  and from the evil of my seeing,  from  
the evil of my tongue  and from the evil of my heart,  from the evil of my semen.  
O Allah!  I seek refuge  with You from the evil neighbour  in the residence,  for 
indeed,  it is possible  for the desert  neighbour  to move.  O Allah! I seek refuge  
with You from (the evil of) cruelty,  heedlessness,  dependence,  humiliation  and 
humbleness,  and I seek refuge with You from being given to infidelity,  
destitution,  wickedness,  schism,  hypocrisy,  bad manners  and the constriction  of 
sustenance,  and showing  off to be heard  or seen of men, and I seek refuge  with  
You from being  vulnerable  to deafness,  muteness,  blindness,  madness,  leprosy,  
the worst  of ailments.
O Allah! I seek refuge  with You from the loss of Your Blessing,  from the 
turning  of Your Power,  from Your Sudden  Wrath,  and from all kinds of Your  
Anger  and Displeasure.  O Allah!  I seek refuge  with You from the torment  of the 
fire (of Hell) and from the affliction  of the fire, and from the punishment  of the 
grave and from the evil of the affliction  of richness,  and from the evil of the 
affliction  of poverty,  and from the evil affliction  of Al-Masih  (Antichrist)  Ad- 
Dajjal,  and I seek refuge  with You from falling  in debt  and from  committing  sins.  
O Allah!  I seek refuge  with You from  a soul which  is never  satisfied  (with  what  is 
given  to it), from a heart  which  is not submissive,  from a prayer  which  is of no 
benefit,  and from  an invocation  which  receives  no answer,  and I seek refuge  with  
You from  the evil of anxiety  and from the affliction  of the breast.  O Allah!  I seek  
refuge  with You from being  overpowered  by debt, from being  overpowered  by 
the enemy,
misfortune):  and Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon Muhammad  and upon  
each chosen  servant  from  all of the worlds.619
me
and from the schadenfreude  of the enemies  (because  of my


Page 622:
620 The quarter  of the acts of worship
CHAPTER  FIVE:  ON SUPPLICATIONS  HANDED  DOWN  
ON DIFFERENT  OCCASIONS
When  the morning  comes  upon you, and you hear the Call to Prayer,  it is 
desirable  that you should  repeat  the words  of Adhan;  and we have mendoned  
that earlier,  as well as the supplications  of coming  in and out of the privy,  and the 
supplications  of performing  ablution  in the Book of Purification.  When you 
come  out to the mosque,  you might  say: "O Allah!  make  light in my heart,  light in 
my tongue;  and make  light in my hearing  and light in my seeing,  and make  light  
on my back and light in front of me, and make light from above  me. O Allah!  
endow  me with light."  You might  further  say: "O Allah!  I ask You, by the right  
the askers  have upon  you, and by the right of my walk to You (to offer  prayer  in 
the mosque),  for indeed,  I've not come  out of arrogance  or haughtiness,  nor by 
way of showing  off to be seen or heard  of men: on the contrary,  I’ve come  out to 
safeguard  myself  from Your Displeasure,  and seek Your Good  Pleasure:  I ask 
You to deliver  me from  the fire (of Hell) and to forgive  for me my sins, for none  
barring  You could  forgive  sins."
When  you come out of the house  for a certain  need, you might  say: "In the 
Name of Allah, my Lord: I seek refuge with You from wronging  or being  
wronged  (by others),  from behaving  ignorantly  (towards  others)  or falling a 
victim  of the ignorance  (of others).  In the Name  of Allah,  Most  Gracious,  Most  
Merciful.  There  is neither  might  nor power  but with Allah,  Most High, Most  
Great.  In the Name  of Allah:  I put my trust  in Allah."
When  you reach  the mosque  and intend  to enter  it, you might  say: "O Allah!  
send Your Prayer  and Peace  upon Muhammad  "Peace  be upon him" and upon  
the family  of Muhammad.  O Allah!  forgive  for me all of my sins, and open to me 
the gates of Your  Mercy."  Move  forward  your right foot first to enter.  When  you 
see in the mosque  him who practices  or is engaged  in transaction  you might  say: 
"Might  Allah deprive  your trade of profit!"  if you see him who beseeches  people  
for a lost thing  in the mosque  you might  say: "Might  Allah  not restore  it to you!"  
this is in compliance  with the command  of the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s 
blessing  and peace  be upon  him”.
If you offer the Morning  two-rak'ah  prayer,  you might  say (according  to the 
narration  on the authority  of Ibn Abbas  from the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s 
blessing  and peace  be upon  him”): "In the Name  of Allah!  O Allah!  I ask You (to 
endow  me with) mercy  from You therewith  to guide  my (mind  and) heart,  unite  
my good merits,  and gather  my scattered  things,  avert afflictions  from me, set 
right  my religion,  secure  my absence,  raise up my presence,  purify  my deed,  make  
bright  my face, lead me to the right path, protect  me from every  kind of evil. O 
Allah!  give me true faith and certainty  after  which  there  will be no infidelity,  and 
(provide  me with) mercy,  therewith  I attain die honour  of Your Glory and 
Majesty  in this world  and in the hereafter.  O Allah!  I ask you to help me attain  
success  at the time of judgement,  (to raise me up to) the ranks  of the martyrs,  and!


Page 623:
Book  nine:  Celebrations  and invocations
the living  of the happy  ones, to emerge  victory  over the enemies,  and get the 
company  of the Prophets.  O Allah! I offer my needs to You, in spite of the 
weakness  of my mind, the lack of my resourcefulness,  and the shortage  of my 
deeds,  and my neediness  to Your  Mercy:  I ask You O (Allah)  Who  suffices  for all 
matters,  and cures the breasts  (of all diseases),  to save me, as well as You save  
(Your  servants  from the dangers  of) the different  oceans,  from the torment  of 
the blazing  fire and from the call of destruction,  and from the affliction  of the 
graves.  O Allah!  I desire  to You and ask You O Allah,  Lord  of the worlds,  to give  
that of which  my mind runs short,  that which  my deed proves  too weak to 
acquire,  and that which  my intention  and ambition  fail to attain,  of such of good  
as You have promised  to give anyone  of Your  servants,  or of such of good as 
You are going  to give anyone  of Your Creatures.  O Allah! make  us guides  and 
rightly-guided,  and not straying  nor misleading,  who wage war against  Your  
enemies,  and make  peace  with Your  devotees,  who love,  with Your  Love,  such of 
Your  creatures  as obeys  You, and become  enemies,  with Your  enmity,  such of 
Your  creatures  as opposes  You. O Allah!  this is our supplication,  and it is up to 
You to answer  it, and this is our effort,  and on you we put our trust;  and we all 
are to Allah,  to Whom  we shall return;  and there  is neither  might  nor power  but 
with Allah,  Most High, Most Great,  Lord of strong  rope (of faith) and well-  
directed  matter  (of religion):  I ask You to give me security  on the Day of the 
Threat  (i.e. the Day of Judgement),  and to admit  me to the Garden  on the Day 
of Eternity,  in the company  of Your nearest  devotees  and martyrs,  and those  
who used to perform  bowings  and prostrations  again and again (in their  
prayers),  who always  fulfill their pledges:  You are Oft-Merciful,  Full of loving  
kindness,  Who  always  do what  You will. Glorified  be He, Who  is dressed  in and 
speaks  with power  and honour!  Glorified  be He, Who shows kindness  and 
generosity  (towards  His servants)  with His Glory!  Glorified  be He, to Whom  
only glory  is fitting!  Glorified  be He, Lord of Bounty  and Grace!  Glorified  be 
He, Lord of Power,  Honour  and Majesty!  Glorified  be He, Who takes account  
of all things  with His Knowledge!  O Allah!  make  light in my heart,  light in my 
grave,  light in my hearing,  light in my seeing,  light in my hair, light in my 
complexion,  light in my flesh,  light  in my blood,  light in my bone,  light in front  
of me, light on my back,  light on my right side, light on my left side, light over  
me, light underneath  me! O Allah!  increase  me in light,  grant  me light,  and make  
light for me!"
When  you bow, say in your bowing:  "O Allah!  to You I have bowed,  to You  
I've submitted,  and to You I've surrendered,  and in You I've put my trust: You  
my Lord.  There  have submitted  to You my hearing  and seeing,  my brain,  my 
bone,  my sinew,  and all that is carried  by my feet, (all have submitted)  to Allah,  
the Sustainer  and Cherisher  of the worlds."  You could  further  say thrice,  if you so 
like: Exalted  be my Lord,  Most  Great"  or Exalted  and hallowed  be (Allah)  Lord  
of angels  and spirits."  When  you raise your head from bowing,  you might  say:621
me
are


Page 624:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
"Allah  hears such as praises  Him: O our Lord!  To You be the praise,  as much  as 
to fill the heavens  and the earth,  and such of things  afterwards  as You will, (O 
Allah)  the worthiest  of praise  and glory,  as most fitting  for a servant  to say (in 
appreciation  of his Lord);  and we all are but servants  to You: there  is nothing  to 
withhold  what You give, and there is none to give what  You withhold;  and the 
good fortune  of the luckiest  one could  not avail him from  You (or without  Your  
Help). ”
When  you fall in prostration,  you might  say: "O Allah!  to You I've prostrated  
myself,  and in You I've believed,  and to You I've surrendered.  My face has fallen  
in prostration  to Him, Who has created  it and given it the best of shapes,  and 
created  both  its hearing  and sight  out of it: Blessed  be Allah,  the Best of Creators.  
O Allah!  my body and image  have prostrated  themselves  to You, and my heart  
has believed  in You: I confess  of Your  Blessing  upon me, and I confess  of my 
sins, and this is what I've drawn  upon myself:  forgive  for me, for none barring  
You could forgive  sins." But you might  also say thrice (instead):  Exalted  be my 
Lord,  Most  High."
When  you finish  from the prayer  you might  say: “O Allah!  You are (the source  
of) Peace,  and from You peace (is expected):  Blessed  and Exalted  be You (O 
Allah) Lord of Majesty,  Glory and Honour",  and supplicate  with the other  
supplications  which  we have  mentioned  earlier.
When you stand to leave the gathering,  and want to supplicate  with a 
supplication  therewith  to plot out the falsity  of such gathering,  you might  say: 
Exalted  be You O Allah,  and with Your  Praise  (I exalt  You):  I bear testimony  
to the fact that there is no god (to be worshipped)  but You. I pray for Your  
Forgiveness  and turn to You in repentance.  I've done evil and wronged  
myself:  so, please,  forgive  for me, for none  barring  You could  forgive  sins."
When you enter the market  you might say: "There  is no god (to be 
worshipped)  but Allah,  the One and Only,  with Whom  there  is no partner;  His is 
the dominion,  and to Him is the praise,  and it is He Who  gives  life, and it is He 
Who brings  to death,  and He is Ever-Living,  Who never  dies; in His Hand is 
good,  and He has power  over all things.  In the Name  of Allah!  O Allah!  I ask 
You the good of this market,  and the good of what it contains.  O Allah!  I seek  
refuge  with You from the evil of this market  and from the evil of what it 
contains.  O Allah!  I seek refuge  with You from  taking  therein  a deceptive  oath or 
having  a losing  transaction."
If you are in debt,  you might  say: "O Allah!  suffice  me with  Your  lawful  things  
from Your unlawful  things,  and make me independent,  by Your Bounty,  from  
anyone  else other  than You."  When  you put on a new dress you might  say: "O 
Allah! You've  dressed  me in this new dress: Praise be to You. I ask You (to 
bestow  upon  me) of its good,  and of the good  of that for which  it has been  made,  
and I seek refuge  with You from  its evil, and from the evil of that for which  it has 
been made."  If you a bad omen  which  you dislike,  you might  say: "O Allah!622
none


Page 625:
Book  nine:  Celebrations  and invocations
barring  You brings  good,  and none  barring  You removes  evil; and there  is neither  
might  nor power  but with Allah."  when  you see the new moon,  you might  say:
'O Allah!  make it emerge  upon us with safety,  faith, righteousness,  peace and 
Islam,  and help us do what  You like and is well-pleased  with,  and keep away  from  
what You dislike  and displeased  with: your and my Lord is Allah."  You might  
further  say: "You are a new moon  of guidance  and good:  I've believed  in Your  
Creator:  O Allah!  I ask You (to make me enjoy  of) the good of this month,  the 
good  of the Divine  Fate, and I seek refuge  with You from the evil of the Day of 
Mustering."  But before  that, you should  say Takbir  thrice.
When  the wind  blows  you might  say: "O Allah!  I ask You (to endow  me with)  
the good of this wind, the good of what it carries,  and the good of that with  
which  it has been sent, and I ask You from its evil, from the evil of what it 
carries,  and from the evil of that with which  it has been sent."  When  the news  of 
the death  of anyone  reaches  you, you might  say: "We all are to Allah to Whom  
we shall return,  and we all are going  to turn to our Lord. O Allah! enlist him 
among  the doers of good, and make his book in the highest  place (of the 
Garden),  and be his successor  over his offspring  among  the remaining  ones. O 
Allah!  forbid  not us his reward,  and put not us to affliction  and trial after him,  
and forgive  for him and for us."
When  you give in charity,  you might  say: "O our Lord!  Accept  it from  us, for 
indeed,  You are All-Hearing,  All-Knowing."  When you lose something,  you 
might  say: " It may be that our Lord  will give us in exchange  one better  than this: 
for we do turn to Him (in repentance)!"  At the beginning  of anything,  you might  
say: "O our Lord!  Bestow  upon  us mercy  from  Yourself  and dispose  of our affair
for us in the right  way! O my Lord!  Expand  me my breast,  and ease my task for
»»me.623
When  you cast a glance  at the sky, you might say: "O Our Lord! not for 
naught  have you created  (all) this! Glory to You! Give us salvation  from the 
Penalty  of the Fire. Blessed  is He Who made constellations  in the skies, and 
placed  therein  a Lamp  and a Moon  giving  light."  When  you hear the sound  of the 
thunder,  you might  say: Exalted  be He, Whose  Praises  the thunder  and the angels  
celebrate,  for fear of Him."  When  you see both thunder  and lightning,  you might  
say, according  to the narration  of Ka’b: "O Allah!  ruin not us with Your  Anger,  
nor destroy  us with Your Punishment,  and provide  us with health  and power  
before  that."  When  it rains,  you might  say: "O Allah!  let it be a blessed  (source  of) 
and beneficial  precipitation!  O Allah!  make it a rain-laden  cloud  of mercy water
and not a rain-laden  cloud  of torment."
If you grow anger,  you might say: "O Allah! forgive  for me my sin, and 
remove  the rage of my heart,  and save me from  Satan,  the despised.  If you fear a 
people  you might  say: "O Allah!  Verily,  
their front,  and we seek refuge  with You from their evil." If you fight a people  
you might  say: "O Allah!  You aremake  You (our protecting  shield)  in we
my supporting  forearm  and helper,  and it is


Page 626:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
with (the help of) You that I fight (my enemies)."  When  there is a whir in your  
ear, you might  invoke  Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon Muhammad  "Peace  be 
upon him", and say: "Might  Allah remember  him who remembers  me with  
good!"  if you see the answer  of your invocation,  you might  say: "Praise  be to 
Allah  with Whose  Honour,  Power  and Glory  the good things  are fulfilled."  And  
if it slows  you might  say: "Praise  be to Allah  for every  state."
If you hear the Call to Maghrib  prayer,  you might  say: "O Allah!  this is the 
beginning  of Your night, which is, at the same time, the ending  of Your  
daylight,  and (those  are) the voice of the people  who invoke  You and attend  
Your  prayers:  I ask You to forgive  for me." If you are befallen  by a distress,  you 
might say: "O Allah! I'm Your servant,  son of Your servant,  and of Your  
servant-girl,  and my forelock  is in Your  Hand,  and Your  Judgement  (pertaining  
to me) is to be accomplished,  and such of decrees  as You ordain  in relation  to 
me is fully just: I ask You, by virtue  of all of Your Names  therewith  You've  
named  Yourself,  or You've  sent in Your Book, or You've  taught  anyone  of 
Your  creatures,  or You've  kept it in the knowledge  of the unseen  with You, to 
make  the Qur'an  the spring  of my heart,  the light of my breast,  the (cause  of) 
removing  my anxiety,  and eliminating  my sadness  and distress."  the Messenger  
of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him” said: "None  is befallen  by 
sadness  thereupon  he supplicates  with that supplication,  but that Allah  
Almighty  removes  his anxiety,  and makes  him joyful  instead."  It was said: "O 
Messenger  of Allah!  should  we not learn it?" the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s 
blessing  and peace be upon him” said: "Yes, it is incumbent  upon him who  
hears  it to learn  it."
If you experience  pain in your body,  or you find it in the body of someone,  
recite  then the incantation  of the Messenger  of Allah  “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  
be upon  him”: whenever  anyone  complained  of a harm  or injury,  he would  place  
his index  finger  on the ground  and raise it saying:  "In the Name  of Allah!  (with  
the help of) the earth  of our land,  the saliva  of ourselves,  our patient  will be cured  
by the Leave  of (Allah)  our Lord."  If you experience  pain in your body,  put your  
hand on the very place of pain in your body and say thrice:  "In the Name  of 
Allah"  and then say seven  times:  "I seek refuge  with the Power  and Honour  of 
Allah  Almighty  from the evil of anything  I fear." If you are befallen  by distress,  
you might  say: "There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah,  Most  High,  Most  
Forbearing.  There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah,  Lord of the Throne  
(of Majesty),  Most  Great.  There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah,  the Lord  
of the seven  heavens  and the Lord  of the Throne  (of Majesty),  Most  Generous."
If you want  to go to bed, perform  ablution  at first, then lie on your right side 
facing  the Qiblah,  and then glorify  Allah  "Allahu  Akbar"  (Allah  is Greater)  thirty-  
four times,  exalt Him "Subhanallah"  (Exalted  be Allah) thirty-three  times,  and 
praise  Him "Al-hamdu  lillah" (Praise  be to Allah) thirty-three  times.  Then you 
might say: "O Allah! I seek refuge with Your Good Pleasure  from Your624


Page 627:
Book  nine: Celebrations  and invocations
Displeasure,  with Your forgiveness  from Your punishment,  and I seek refuge  
with (the mercy  of) You from (the anger  of) You. O Allah!  By no means  could  I 
reckon  Your  Praises,  even though  I do my best, for indeed,  You are just as You  
have praised  Yourself.  O Allah!  in Your  Name  I live and die. O Allah,  Lord of 
the heavens  and the earth,  and the Lord and King  of Everything,  Splitter  of seed  
and kernel,  Revealer  of the Torah,  the Gospel  and the Qur'an:  I seek refuge  with  
You from the evil of him who has evil, and from the evil of every moving  
creature  over whose  forelock  You have grasp:  verily,  You are the First, and there  
is nothing  before  You, and You will be the Last, and there  will be nothing  after  
You; You are the Evident,  and there is nothing  above  You, and You are the 
Hidden,  and there  is nothing  beyond  You: fulfill  my debt  on my behalf,  and make  
me independent  from  poverty.
O Allah!  It is You Who created  myself,  and It is You who will cause  it to die: 
it is up to You to cause  it to die, and it is up to You to bring  it to life (once  
again  on the Day of Judgement).  O Allah!  if you cause  it to die, then forgive  for 
it, and if You bring  it to life, then keep it (from evil). O Allah!  I ask you to 
endow  me with power  and health  in both the world  and the hereafter.  In the 
Name  of You O my Lord  I've laid my side: forgive  for me my sin. O Allah!  save  
me from  Your  Punishment  on the Day You will gather  Your  servants.  O Allah!
I submit  myself  to You, turn my face towards  You, entrust  all my affairs  to 
you, and depend  upon  you for Your  Blessings  both with hope and fear of 
you. There  is no way to flee from you, and there is no place  of protection  
and safety  except  with You O Allah!  I believe  in Your Book (the Qur'an)  
which  you have revealed  and in Your Prophet  (Mohammad)  whom  you 
have sent. ”625
Let it be the last of your supplications  (before  sleeping),  in accordance  
with the command  of the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace be 
upon him”. But, let one say before  that: "O Allah! cause me to get up (from  
sleep)  in the dearest  our to You,  and use me to do the dearest  of deeds  to You, to 
draw  me near unto You, and take me far away  from Your  Displeasure.  O Allah!  I 
ask You and You give me, and I pray for Your  Forgiveness,  and You forgive  me, 
and I invoke  You and You respond  to my invocation."  When  you get up from  
your sleep  in the morning,  you might  say: "Praise  be to Allah  Who  has brought  us 
to life after  Fie had caused  us to die (the minor  death  of sleep),  and to Him be the 
resurrection.  The morning  has come upon us, and the Dominion  belongs  to 
Allah,  and both Greatness  and Sovereignty  belong  to Allah,  and both Power  and 
Honour  belong  to Allah  Almighty.  We've  come  to be on the true nature  of Islam  
(on which  all of the people  are created),  and word  of sincerity,  and the religion  of 
Prophet  Muhammad  "Peace  be upon him", and the cult of our father our
Abraham,  who was of true faith,  and he was not one of the pagans.
O Allah!  it is with Your  (Power)  that morning  and evening  has come  upon  us, 
and it is with Your  (Power  over all things)  that we live and die, and to You be the 
destiny  (the end of the journey  of all of the people).  O Allah!  we ask You to raise


Page 628:
626 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
us up, on this day, to every kind of good, and we seek refuge  with You from  
committing  or incurring  any evil upon  a Muslim,  for it is You Who say: " It is He 
Who does take your souls  by night,  and has knowledge  of all that you have done  
by day; by day does He raise you up again;  that a term appointed  be fulfilled;  in 
the end unto Him  will be your  return;  then  will He show  you the truth of all that 
you did." (Al-An'am  60)
O Allah,  that cleave  the daybreak  (from  the dark),  make  the night  for rest and 
tranquillity,  and the sun and moon  for the reckoning  (of time): I ask You (to 
endow  me with) the good of this day, and the good of what it contains,  and I 
seek refuge  with You from the evil of that day, and from the evil of what it 
contains.  In the Name  of Allah!  Allah's  Will (be done)!  there  is no power  but with  
Allah;  Allah's  will (be done);  every  blessing  is from Allah;  Allah's  will (be done);  
all good  is in the hand of Allah;  Allah's  will (be done);  none could  avert evil but 
Allah: I've accepted  Allah as my Lord, Islam as my religion  and Muhammad  
"Peace  be upon  him" as my Prophet.  O (Allah)  our Lord!  In You do we put our 
trust,  and to You  we turn (in repentance),  and to You be the end of the journey."
When  the evening  comes  upon  one, let him say the same  with the substitution  
of "the evening  has come upon us" for "morning  has come upon us", and the 
following  addition:  "I seek refuge  with Allah's  Perfect  speech  and all of His 
Names  from the evil of what  He has created,  evolved,  from the evil of him who  
has evil, and from the evil of every moving  creature  over whose  forelock  You  
have  grasp:  verily,  it is my Lord that is on a straight  path."
If you look at yourself  in the mirror,  you might  say: "Praise  be to Allah  Who  
created  me, fashioned  me in due proportion,  and gave me a just bias, made  
honoured  and good the image  of my face, and made  me one of those  who bow  
(to Allah  in Islam)."  If you buys a servant,  a slave or a new animal,  take hold of 
its forelock  and say: "O Allah!  I ask You (to make  me enjoy  of) its good,  and the 
good  on which  it has been created,  and I seek refuge  with You from  its evil, and 
from  the evil on which  it has been  created."  If you like to congratulate  somebody  
on his marriage,  you might  say: "Allah  might  bless you and send His Blessing  
upon you and gather  you both in what is good."  If you fulfill your debt, you 
might  say to the receiver  of his right: "Might  Allah  bless you in your family  and 
property,  in accordance  with the statement  of the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s 
blessing  and peace  be upon  him” who said: "Verily,  the reward  of borrowing  is to 
praise  and give back (what  is borrowed  to the lender)."
Those  are some invocations  and supplication  which are necessary  for the 
follower  of the path to keep;  and we've  mentioned  the other  invocations  such as 
those of journey,  prayer and ablution  in the Books of Hajj, prayer and 
purification.  But you might  say: "What  is the significance  of invocation  seeing


Page 629:
Book  nine:  Celebrations  and invocations
that the preordained  fate could  not be averted?"  it then should  be known  to you 
that it is out of the fate to avert the calamity  by virtue  of invocation,  since the 
invocation  acts as a cause  of averting  the adversity,  and bringing  about  
the same way as the shield  acts as a cause of averting  the arrow,  and the water  
acts as a cause  of bringing  the plant  out of the earth.  As well as the shield  averts  
the arrow  thereupon  both force each other,  both invocation  and adversity  force  
each other.
It is not a necessary  prerequisite  for one to admit  the preordained  fate of Allah  
Almighty  not to carry the weapons,  since Allah Almighty  says: O you who  
believe!  take your precautions,  and either go forth in parties  or go forth all 
together"  (An-Nisa'  71)627
mercy,  in
vO  bit v/t£ >
Nor is it not to water  the land after sowing  the seeds on the ground  of the 
saying:  "If it has been preordained  for the plant  to grow,  the seeds  then will grow,  
and if it has not been,  they will not grow."  On the contrary,  to make  association  
between  the causes  and the causers  is the primary  decision  of judgement,  which  is 
like the twinkling  of the eye, if even not quicker,  and giving  priority  to the causers  
over the causes  according  to promotion  and due proportion  is the preordained  
fate: the One Who  preordained  good  has doomed  it to be for a certain  cause,  and 
the One Who preordained  evil has doomed  a certain  cause  of averting  it. in this 
way, there is no contradiction  between  those matters  in the sight of the open-  
minded.
On the other  hand,  the invocation  has such of benefits  as we've  mentioned  in 
the chapter  of celebration  (of Allah  Almighty).  It gives  rise to the full presence  of 
the heart with Allah Almighty,  which is the highest  act of worship.  For this 
reason,  the Messenger  of Allah “Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him” said:  
"The invocation  constitutes  the marrow  of religious  service."  The creatures  at 
most  do not divert  their hearts  to the celebration  of Allah  Almighty  unless  they  
are befallen  by a certain  need or fall victims  of a certain  distress.  To be sure, " 
When  evil seizes  man, (he comes)  full of prolonged  prayer!"  (Fussilat  51)
i 'ijj >
The need then requires  man to take refuge  to invocation,  and the invocation,  
in turn, brings the heart back to Allah Almighty,  by way of supplication  and 
assent,  which  constitutes  the celebration  (of the Praises  of Allah  Almighty),  which  
is the most  honourable  acts of worship.
For this reason,  the trial was entrusted  to the Prophets  and Messengers  
"Peace  be upon them"  from amongst  all the people,  followed  by the saints,  
and then those nearer  (to Allah),  for, by virtue  of supplication  and reliance  
(on Allah  Almighty),  it brings  the heart  back to Allah  Almighty,  and prevents  
them  from forgetting  (the celebration  of Allah).  But richness,  in most  cases,  is 
a direct  cause  of arrogance  and haughtiness,  for indeed  " man does transgress  
all due bounds,  In that he looks  upon  himself  as self-sufficient."  (Al-Alaq  6:7)


Page 630:
628 The quarter  of the acts of worsh  ip
i 0 5*^1  iUj O' 0 TJ&  Oj >
Tliis is, however,  what we like to bring from the entire literature  of 
celebrations  and invocations;  and Allah Almighty  helps us do well. As for the 
remaining  supplications  of journey,  eating  and visiting  the patient  (to enquire  
about his health),  they will be brought  later, Allah Willing,  in their different  
locations;  and in Allah  Almighty  do we put our trust.


Page 631:
Jt;^ • : . - — ; —1-*“
:1MD8  ft*IB:•._____________ ____ __-u_________ 3D (3?- IFtp 11 
* ■ , __________________
and the details  of giving  life to the night  (by standing  
for supererogatory  prayer)
In the Name  of Allah,  Most  Gracious,  Most  Merciful.
We send so much praises  to Allah Almighty  for all of His Blessings  and 
Favours,  and celebrate  His (Praises  and Glories)  in such a way as to leave no 
atom of arrogance  or flight (from  Allah)  in the heart,  and give thanks  to Him in 
view of the fact that He has made both night and day come in succession  for 
those who like to celebrate  (His Praises)  or give thanks  (to Him). We invoke  
Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon His Prophet  "Peace  be upon him",  whom  He 
sent with truth as a bearer  of glad tidings (of Allah's  reward  for the faithful  
believers)  and a warner  (of His Punishment  for the infidels),  and also upon his 
pure family,  and honoured  companions,  who strove themselves  in sendee  of 
Allah Almighty  every morning  and night, every forenoon  and evening  so much  
that each one of them  came  to be (as high as) a guiding  star and a lamp spreading
light  in the religion.
To go further:  Allah Almighty  made the earth subject  to all of His servants,  
not only to reside  in its different  parts and sides, but also to take it as a halting  
place therefrom  to get provisions  for their journey  towards  their final homeland,  
and save masterpieces  of deeds  and good merits  for their own selves,  and avoid
assurance  that the life proceeds  forward its entanglements  and traps, with the 
with them  in the same way as a ship sails with its riders.  To be sure, the people  
are travellers  in this world,  and the cradle  constitutes  die first of their resdng  
places  while  the grave  the last of them,  and their final homeland  will be either  the 
Garden  (for the faithful  believers)  or the fire (of Hell for the infidels),  and their  
lifetime  is the distance  of the journey,  whose  stages  are the years,  Farsakhs  are the 
months,  miles are the days; and one's breaths  constitute  his steps, his obedience  
(to Allah  and His Messenger)  is his merchandise,  and his time is his capital,  while  
his desires  and lusts constitute  the highwaymen  who stand on his road; and his 
profit  will be to win the meeting  of Allah Almighty  in the home  of peace,  in the 
great dominion  and the permanent  blessing,  and his loss will be to be far 
removed  from (the Mercy  and Kindness  of) Allah Almighty,  in the fetters,  chains  
and painful  chastisement  in the lowest  bottoms  of the (fire of) Hell. The heedless  
even in one of his breaths  which  he spends  naught  in doing  such of deeds as 
draw  him closer  to (the Presence  of) Allah  Almighty  will endanger  himself  to the 
infinite  loss and sigh on the Day of Mutual  loss and gain.
In view of this great danger  and momentous  risk, those who
were granted629


Page 632:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
success  have rolled  up their sleeves  and given  up the pleasures  of their souls,  and 
utilized  the remaining  of their lifetimes,  to arrange  the functions  of regular  
divisions  in accordance  with the recurrence  of time, in eagerness  to give life to 
both night and day, to draw themselves  much  closer  to (the Presence  of Allah)  
the Sovereign,  the Compeller,  and seek after the abode  of eternity.  In this way, it 
becomes  important,  for the science  of the way to the hereafter,  to explain  in 
detail how to partition  the regular  divisions  and distribute  the acts of worship  
which  we have expounded  earlier  to cover  the different  times (during  night and 
day);  and this is shown  in two chapters:
Chapter  one: the excellence  and constitution  of regular  divisions  during  night  
and day.
Chapter  two: the way of giving life to the night; its excellence;  and its 
appurtenances.630
CHAPTER  ONE:  ON THE EXCELLENCE,  
CONSTITUTION  AND  RULES  OF REGULAR  DIVISIONS
The Excellence  Of regular  divisions,  And The Exposition  
Of The Fact That To Do Them  Regularly  Leads  To The Right  Way
Of Allah  Almighty
It should  be known  that those  who have deep insights  come to know  that 
there is no salvation  (from  perdition  and destruction)  but through  the meeting  
of Allah  Almighty,  and that there  is no way to meet (Allah  Almighty)  unless  one 
dies while  in the state of love for and knowledge  of Allah  Almighty,  and that by 
no means  could both love and affability  be achieved  but through  the regular  
(and permanent)  celebration  and remembrance  of the Beloved,  as well as the 
knowledge  of Him could hardly  be accomplished  but through  the regular  (and  
permanent)  meditation  on Him and on His Attributes  and Acts, since in the 
whole  existence,  there is nothing  (of significance)  rather  than Allah Almighty  
and His Acts.
Furthermore,  it is not easy to be regular  in celebration  and contemplation  
unless  one bid farewell  to the (vanities  of) this world and its related  desires,  
from which  one should  be only satisfied  with what enables  him to fulfill his 
necessary  needs and minimum  requirements;  and all of that could not be 
achieved  unless  one spends  the times of both night and day in the different  
functions  of celebration  and contemplation.  But (unfortunately),  according  to 
its inclination  to boredom  and tedium,  on which  it has been created,  in no way  
could the soul keep patient  on one thing of those which  are 
celebration  and meditation,  for were it to be brought  back to one thing, it 
would  soon feel weary  and exhausted,  in spite of the fact that Allah  Almighty  
never  ceases  (to give rewards)  until you are exhausted  (and fail to do deeds  of 
religious  service).
For this reason,  it is necessary  to be kind to it, by having  it relieved  through  
moving  from one thing  to another,  and from one way to another  in accordancehelpful  in both


Page 633:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions
with the different  times,  in order  that through  its movement,  its pleasure  would  
become  stronger,  and through  its pleasure,  its desire (for the hereafter)  would  
become  much greater;  and the more its desire remains  undying,  the more it 
continues  to be regular  (on celebration  and meditadon).  This fact lies behind  the 
different  way of distributing  regular divisions:  to be sure, celebration  and 
meditation  should  cover  all or most of the times.  That's  because  the soul, by its 
nature,  is inclined  to the pleasures  and delights  of this world.
If one spends  half of his time to dispose  of its affairs  and fulfill his lawful  
desires  and the other  half to the acts of worship,  he would  be more  inclined  to 
the pleasures  and delights  of this world  than to the acts of worship,  in view  of its 
agreement  with his own disposition,  seeing  that the time shall be divided  between  
both equally:  how should  then they force each other,  since the nature  is more  
inclined  to one of them than to the other?  However,  both the outward  and the 
inward  (of the soul) back each other  in demand  of the vanities  of this world,  to 
which  the heart  is dedicated.  But, it is against  the course  of nature  to bring  it back  
to the acts of worship,  to which  the heart could  hardly  be faithfully  devoted  or 
fully present,  except  at a few times  (during  night  and day).
So, he, who likes to enter  the Garden  with no reckoning,  let him spend  all (or 
at least the most part) of his time in the acts of worship;  and he, who likes to 
have the scale  of his good  deeds  and the weight  of his good  things  become  heavy,  
let him then engage  the most  part of his time in the acts of worship.  If he mixes  a 
good  deed with an evil deed,  he shall run the risk (of falling  to destruction).  But,  
the hope (for Allah's  Mercy)  is ceaseless,  and Allah's  Forgiveness,  out of His 
Bounty,  is expected:  it may be that Allah Almighty,  out of His Bounty  and 
Generosity,  should  forgive  for him.
This is, however,  what has been disclosed  to those  of deep insight.  If you do 
not belong  to them,  consider  then Allah's  Speech  to His Messenger  "Peace  be 
upon him", and learn it with the light of faith. Allah Almighty  addressed  the 
nearest  of His devotees,  who has the highest  rank in His Sight,  saying:  " True,  
there is for you by day prolonged  occupation  with ordinary  duties:  But keep in 
remembrance  the name of your Lord and devote  yourself  to Him whole ­
heartedly."  (Al-Muzzammil  7:8)
i 0 «JJ &}ppi  O £4-
Allah  Almighty  further  says: "And celebrate  the name  of your Lord morning  
and evening.  And part of the night,  prostrate  yourself  to Him; and exalt Him a 
long  night  through."  (Al-Insan  25:26)
He Almighty  also says: "and celebrate  the praises  of your Lord,  before  the 
rising  of the sun and before  (its) setdng,  And during  part of the night,  (also,)  
celebrate  His praises  and (so likewise)  after the postures  of adoration."  (Qaf  
39:40)631
/J j£iu  JJi 0 kjj  & P/M)  >


Page 634:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
Jlsj jl3 «L*i&  ^4—J jJC  <1^ ^
4 (£?S 4j>*t-~3 S^  o?5
Allah "Exalted  and Hallowed  be He" says too: " and celebrate  the praises  of 
they Lord the while you stand forth,  And for part of the night also praise  you 
Him,  and at the retreat  of the stars!"  (At-Tur  48:49)
i SfS^_P^y^i3  {gp fyu l&j jI+£ ^—3 £X*jjf&\ypo\ 3 ^632
Allah Almighty  also says: " Truly the rising by night is most potent  for 
governing  (the soul), and most suitable  for (framing)  the Word (of Prayer  and 
Praise)."  (Al-Muzzammil  6)
i 0 y/ v) i> SJ' oj >
He Almighty  further  says: " and celebrate  (constandy)  the praises  of your  
Lord,  before  the rising  of the sun, and before  its setting;  yea, celebrate  them for 
part of the hours of the night,  and at the sides of the day: that you may have  
(spiritual)  joy." (Ta Ha 130)
S=^ iS^*  q*5 S^5 4-*-^ ’
i <© Toi^ij
He Almighty  says too: "And establish  regular  prayers  at the two ends of the 
day and at the approaches  of the night: for those things  that are good remove  
those that are evil: be that the word of remembrance  to those  who remember  
(their  Lord)."  (Hud  114)
4 c^iIidTo^aJuc^ll!3-Toj Jdfuijj  jtjlT  ojo ^
Consider  further  how and with which  qualities  He Almighty  describes  those  
who achieve  felicity  among  His servants  in His saying:  "Is one who worships  
devoutly  during the hours of the night prostrating  himself  or standing  (in 
adoration),  who takes heed of the Hereafter,  and who places his hope in the 
Mercy  of his Lord, (like one who does not)? Say: "Are those equal,  those who  
know and those who do not know? It is those who are endued with  
understanding  that receive  admonition."  (Az-Zumar  9)
(jytSxj  ^iwjl 1)3 <-4JJ iy>~ji5  iLfllj  I JlC>- llu I flilc- yX qa I
"5 'cyJi
He Almighty  further  says: "Their  limbs do forsake  their beds of sleep, the 
while  they call on their  Lord,  in Fear and Hope."  (As-Sajdah  16)
^ (0) ^5>- -J £f: o^ ^
He "Exalted  and Hallowed  be He" says too: "Those  who spend  the night  in 
adoration  of their Lord  prostrate  and standing."  (Al-Furqan  64)


Page 635:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions  --------
4 © cr?^H3  £
Allah,  Exalted  and Hallowed,  further  says: "They  were in the habit  of sleeping  
but litde by night,  And in the hours  of early dawn,  they (were  found)  praying  for 
Forgiveness."  (Adh-Dhariyat  17:18)
4 Cp ((g); b L* JJl" i_^ if )>
He Almighty  also says: "So (give)  glory  to Allah,  when  you reach  eventide  and 
when  you rise in the morning."  (Ar-Rum  17)633
, j t „
Oir ^
He Almighty  says too: "Send  not away those  who call on their Lord  morning  
and evening,  seeking  His Face."  (Al-An'am  52)
^ © '4^5  bj^ji SjuilL.  >445  b4-4  4^ Vi ^
All of that shows  to you, there  is no doubt,  that the way to (the Presence  of) 
Allah  Almighty  is to observe  the different  times  (during  night  and day) in order  to 
fill them  with regular  divisions.
For this reason,  the Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" said: "The dearest  to Allah Almighty  among  His servants  are those who  
observe  the (time  of the appearance  of) sun and moon  and (the times  of) shades  
in order  to celebrate  (the Praises  of) Allah  Almighty."  Allah  Almighty  says in this 
connection:  "The sun and the moon follow  courses  (exacdy)  computed."  (Ar- 
Rahman  5)
4 {^} o j^H\ 3 ^
He further  says: "Have  you not turned  your vision  to your Lord? How He 
does prolong  the Shadow!  If He willed,  He could  make  it stationary!  Then  do We 
make the sun its guide;  Then  We draw  it in towards  Ourselves,  a contraction  by 
easy stages."  (Al-Furqan  45:46)
. •> JL 4lLlL>-  JLj Lf  Ll ja1*4-1 e~L1 J-Lh  ^45 <Jj 4' ^
<( ({J}) UJJ
He Almighty  also says: "And  the Moon,  We have measured  for it mansions  (to 
traverse)  till it returns  like the old (and withered)  lower  part of a date-stalk."  (Ya 
Sin 39)
He Almighty  further  says: " It is He Who  makes  the stars (as beacons)  for you,  
that you may guide yourselves,  with their help, through  the dark spaces  of land  
and sea: We detail  Our Signs  for people  who know."  (Al-An  am 96)
Ul£a3 JL3 j J4-  ^
4 0 yM  ^y 1


Page 636:
634 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
Think  not that the main  purpose  for which  both the sun and the moon  follow  
their exacdy  computed  courses,  and the shade,  light and stars are created  is to 
enable  you achieve  the affairs  of this world  so much  as it is to help you measure  
the different  times (during  both day and night) in order to occupy  yourself  
therein  by the acts of worship  and religious  service,  and engage  yourself  in the 
trade (of good deeds)  for the hereafter.  This is attested  from the statement  of 
Allah  Almighty:  " And it is He Who made  the Night  and the Day to follow  each  
other: for those who have the will to celebrate  His praises  or to show their  
gratitude."  (Al-Furqan  62)
This means  that both come  in succession,  one after the other,  in order  that 
one might  catch  in any of them  what  he misses  in the other.  In this statement,  He 
Almighty  further  shows  that the main  purpose  is just to celebrate  (the Praises  of 
Allah  Almighty)  or to give thanks  (to Him),  and no more.
Allah  Almighty  further  says: " We have made the Night  and the Day as two 
(of Our) Signs;  the Sign of the Night  have We obscured,  while the Sign of the 
Day We have made  to enlighten  you; that you may seek bounty  from your Lord,  
and that you may know  the number  and count  of the years: all things  have We 
explained  in detail."  (Al-Isra* 12)
✓ * ^ 
q* o}vaI_*  jtfh LlL-J  JJl 4->l* QCLJ jtylllj  JJI
However,  the sought  bounty  here refers to the good reward  and forgiveness  
(of Allah  Almighty);  and we ask Allah  to help us do what  pleases  Him.
The Exposition  Of The Number  And Constitution  
Of Regular  Divisions
It should  be known  to you that the regular  divisions  of the daylight  are seven:  
there is one in the period  between  the daybreak  and the emergence  of the sun 
disk, two in the period  between  the rising  of the sun and its decline,  two in the 
period  between  the sun decline  and the time of Asr, and two in the period  
between  the time of Asr and the sunset.  There  are four regular  divisions  which  
cover  the whole  night:  two in the period  between  sunset  and the time in which  
the people  usually  go to bed, and two in the period  between  the last half of the 
night and the crack  of dawn.  Let's here discuss  the excellence  and duty of each  
regular  division,  and what  is related  to it.
The first regular  division  lies in the period  between  the daybreak  and the 
emergence  of the sun disk; and of a surety,  it is an honourable  period  as shown  
from  Allah's  Oath by it when  He says: "So verily  I call to witness  the Dawn  as it 
breathes  away  the darkness."  (At-Takwir  18)


Page 637:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions
He Almighty  ascribes  to Himself  the attribute  of cleaving  the daybreak  (from  
darkness)  as shown  in His statement:  "He it is that cleaves  the daybreak  (from  the 
dark)."  (Al-An'am  96)635
He Almighty  further  says: " Say: I seek refuge  with (Allah)  the Lord of the 
Daybreak."  (Al-Falaq  1)
Furthermore,  He Almighty  shows  His Power  to draw in the shadow  therein  
when He says: "Then  We draw it in towards  Ourselves,  a contraction  by easy  
stages."  (Al-Furqan  46)
4 Sj)) 1/2-^ LJ J ^
This is the due time of drawing  in the shadow  of night by spreading  out the 
light of the sun. Allah Almighty  guides  the people  to celebrate  the Glories  of 
Allah  therein  in His statement:  "So (give)  glory  to Allah,  when  you reach  eventide  
and when  you rise in the morning"  (Ar-Rum  17)
i ({|} ^
And: " and celebrate  (constantly)  the praises  of your Lord,  before  the rising  of 
the sun, and before  its setting;  yea, celebrate  them for part of the hours of the 
night,  and at the sides of the day: that you may have (spiritual)  joy" (Ta Ha 130)
And: "And  celebrate  the name  of your Lord morning  and evening."  (Al-Insan
25)
As far as the sequence  of its acts is concerned,  let one at first begin,  once he 
wakes  up from  his sleep,  with the celebration  of Allah  Almighty  saying:  "Praise  be 
to Allah  Who has brought  us to life after He had caused  us to die (by sleep),  and 
to Him will our resurrection  be (in the hereafter)..."  up to the end of the 
supplications  and Holy Verses  which we've mentioned  in the invocation  of 
getting  up (from  sleep) in the Book  of Invocations.  While  invoking,  let him put 
his dress with the intention  to cover  his private  parts,  in compliance  with the 
Command  of Allah  Almighty,  and seeking  its aid to worship  Him well, without  
having  the aim of showing  off to be seen of men, or demonstrating  arrogance  
recklessly.
Then,  let him turn to the privy  if he is in need of it, and enter  with his left foot  
reciting  the related  supplications  we've  mentioned  in the Book  of Purification  on 
entrance  and exit. Then,  let him brush  his teeth with the toothpick  according  to 
the traditional  practice  shown  earlier,  and perform  ablution  with observation  of 
all the rules and supplications  explained  in the Book  of Purification.  However,  weon


Page 638:
636 The quarter  of the acts of worship
have introduced  the items of worship  in separation  in order  to mention,  in this 
Book (of Regular  Divisions)  only the point  of setting  and putting  their acts in 
order.  Once he finishes  from performing  ablution,  let him offer the two-rak'ah  
prayer  prior  to Fajr, i.e. the traditional  prayer  the constant  performance  of which  
is regular,  in his house.  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon  him" used to do the same.  After  performing  them,  whether  in the house  or 
in the mosque,  let him recite  the supplication  which  is narrated  on the authority  
of Ibn Abbas  "Allah  be pleased  with both"  which  begins  as such: "O Allah!  I ask 
You (to endow  me with) mercy  from  You, therewith  to guide  my heart..."  to its 
end.
Then, let him come out towards  the mosque,  but let not him forget the 
supplication  related  to his exit to the mosque.  Let not him run hastily  to the 
prayer:  on the contrary,  he should  walk with tranquillity  and reverence  according  
to the narration  which  is handed  down  in this connection,  and he should  not also 
interlace  his fingers.  Then,  let him enter  the mosque  with his right foot first, and 
recite the supplication  which  is handed  down  in relation  to the entrance  of the 
mosque.  Let him seek after  the first row if there  is a place for him, provided  that 
he should  neither  step over the necks  of the people,  nor drive them forcibly  as 
we've  mentioned  earlier  in the Book  of (Prayer,  chapter  of) Friday.  If he has not 
yet offered  the two-rak'ah  prayer  prior to Fajr in his house,  let him offer them in 
the mosque,  and then engage  himself  in the related  supplication.  But in case he 
has offered  them in the house,  let him then offer the two-rak'ah  prayer of 
saluting  the mosque,  and sit after them in expectation  for the obligatory  two-  
rak'ah  prayer  of Fajr in congregation.
It is desirable  to offer the congregational  prayer  when  it is still very dark, for 
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" used to do the 
same. Furthermore,  it is necessary  for one not to leave the congregational  
obligatory  prayers  in general,  and both Fajr and Isha' prayers  in particular,  in view  
of the additional  superiority  they have. In this context,  it is narrated  on the 
authority  of Anas Ibn Malik from The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace be upon him" that he said pertaining  to the Morning  prayer:  "He, who  
performs  ablution  and then comes  out to the mosque,  to offer  the prayer  therein,  
for every  step, he will receive  a good deed,  and an evil deed will be erased  from  
him; and the good deed is as much as ten times the like of it. if he offers  the 
prayer  and turns away on the rising  of the sun, a good deed will be written  for 
him by each hair of his body,  and he will return  with (the reward  of) Hajj which  is 
accepted  (by Allah  Almighty).  If he sits (in the mosque)  until he offers  the Duha  
(Forenoon)  prayer,  for each rak'ah,  two thousand  thousand  good deed will be 
written  for him. He, who offers  the Isha' prayers  (in the mosque  in congregation  
as such),  he will receive  the like of that and will return  with an Umrah  that is 
accepted  (by Allah  Almighty)."
It was the habit  of the men of the early  generation  to enter  the mosque  before  
the rising  of the dawn.  In this issue,  it is narrated  that one of the followers  said: I 
entered  the mosque  before  the rising  of the dawn  and behold!  Abu Hurairah  had


Page 639:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions
preceded  me (to the mosque).  He asked me: "O son of my brother!  For which  
thing  have you come  out of your house  at this hour?"  I said: "I've  
offer the Morning  prayer."  On that he said to me: "Receive  then the glad tidings!  
We used to regard  our 
expectadon  for prayer)  as (equal  in reward  to) a holy batde  in Allah's  Cause  (or he 
said with The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him")."
It is further  narrated  on the authority  of Ali "Allah  be pleased  with him" that 
once  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" knocked  
at the door of the house  in which  he and Fadmah  were living  (at night)  and they  
were sleeping.  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him"  
asked  them:  "Should  you not (get up to) offer  prayer?"  Ali said: I said to him: "O 
Messenger  of Allah!  verily,  our souls are in the Hand  of Allah  Almighty,  and He 
could  raise it if He so likes."  The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon  him" then turned  away  and I heard  him beadng  his thighs  with his hands  
and saying  while  he was turning  away: " but man is, in most  things,  contendous."  
(Al-Kahf  54)637
come  out to
coming  out and sitdng  in the mosque  at this hour (in
Furthermore,  after offering  the two-rak'ah  prayer  prior to Fajr and saying  the 
related  supplication,  one should  engage  himself  in the prayer  for forgiveness  and 
celebration  of the Glories  of Allah Almighty  until the obligatory  prayer is 
established.  Let him say seventy  times: "I pray for the Forgiveness  of Allah  
Almighty  other than Whom  there is no god (to be worshipped),  Ever-Living,  
Self-Subsisting,  Eternal,  to Whom  I turn in repentance"  and one hundred  times:  
"Glory  be to Allah;  Praise  be to Allah;  There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but 
Allah; and Allah is Greater."  Then, let him offer the obligatory  prayer,  with  
observation  of such of external  and internal  proprieties  as we've mentioned  
earlier  pertaining  to prayer  and following  the imam.
When he finishes  from the (obligatory  prayer)  let him keep sitting  in the 
mosque  until the rising  of the sun, and engage  himself  in the celebration  of (the 
Praises  and Glories  of) Allah  Almighty  as we 
its items later. However,  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon  him" said: "To sit in my gathering,  to celebrate  (the Praises  and Glories  of) 
Allah  Almighty  after finishing  from the Dawn  prayer  until the rising  of the sun is 
much dearer to me than to emancipate  four slaves. According  to another  
narration,  whenever  The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" finished  from the Morning  prayer,  he would  keep sitting  in his praying  place  
until the sun would  rise, and he would  pray two rak'ahs  after  its rising  according  
to a certain  version  of this narration.
There are numerous  narrations  in support  of the excellence  of this. It is 
narrated  (for instance)  on the authority  of Al-FIassan  that The Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said while relating  about the 
Mercy  of his Lord  Almighty  that He said: "O son of Adam!  Keep  celebrating  My 
Praises  and Glories  for an hour after Dawn  prayer  and an hour after Asr prayer,are going  to discuss  the sequence  of


Page 640:
638 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
perchance  I would  suffice  you (for Guardian  against  evil) in the period  between  
them."  Since the excellence  of that is then obvious,  let one sit and keep silent  
until the rising  of the sun. let his job be limited  only to four things:  invocations,  
celebrations  (of Allah's  Praises  and Glories)  which  he should  repeat  in the form  
of Tasbihs,  recitation  of the Qur'an,  and meditation  (on Allah's  Signs).
As far as supplications  are concerned,  let him say, after finishing  from his 
prayer:  "O Allah! send Your Prayer,  Blessing  and Peace  upon Muhammad  and 
upon the family  of Muhammad;  O Allah!  Verily,  You are (the source  of) Peace  
(and perfection),  and from You peace  is expected,  and to You peace  returns;  O 
our Lord! Salute  us with peace,  and admit us to the abode of peace (i.e. the 
Garden):  Blessed  and Exalted  be You (Allah) Lord of Majesty,  Glory and 
Honour."  Then,  let him inaugurate  the supplication  with the same with which  
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" used to 
commence  his supplications,  i.e. Exalted  be my Lord,  Most  High,  Most  Supreme,  
Grantor  (of favours)  without  measure.  There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but 
Allah, the One and Only, other than Whom  there is no partner:  His is the 
dominion,  and to him be praise;  He brings  to life as well as He brings  to death,  
and He is Ever-Living  Who never  dies; in His Hand  is good,  and He has power  
over all things.  There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah,  Lord of Blessing,  
Bounty  and (most  fitting  for) good praise.  There  is no god (to be worshipped)  
but Allah,  and we do worship  none but He, with our faith sincere  to Him, even  
against  the will of the unbelievers."  Then,  let him begin with the supplications  
and invocations  which  we've  mentioned  in the third and fourth  chapters  of the 
Book  of Supplications  and Invocations:  let him supplicate  with all of them  if it is 
within  his capacity,  or keep out of them  what seems  to him most  convenient  to 
his state, most ready  to cause his heart to be smooth,  and most light upon his 
tongue.
As for celebrations  (of the Praises  and Glories  of Allah  Almighty),  they are 
words  to be uttered  repeatedly,  and there is great excellence  in their recurrence.  
But we would  not spend  long in mentioning  that. But the limit of repeating  each  
of them  lies between  three or seven  at minimum,  and seventy  or one hundred  at 
maximum,  even though  ten is the optimum.  So, let one repeat  them  as much  as is 
within  the limit of his vacation  and free time, putting  in consideration  that the 
greater  it becomes  in number,  the more the reward  he receives  is excellent.  But 
the optimum  of ten recurrences  is more  moderate,  and more  fitting  for regularity,  
for indeed,  the best of deeds  is that which  one does regularly,  no matter  little it 
might  be; and to be regular  in doing  the least  amount  of items  of a certain  job , in 
case one could not do all or most of its items regularly,  is better and more  
impressive  upon the heart than to do more at interrupted  times.  The parable  of 
the regular  little amount  is like the parable  of the few drops  of water  which  fall in 
succession  on the ground,  and thus leads to making  a small  dig, even if it falls on 
a rock.  The example  of the interrupted  great  amount  is like the example  of a great  
abundance  of water  which  falls interruptedly  at long  intervals,  and has no effect.
Those  statements  are ten: the first is His saying:  "There  is no god (to be


Page 641:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions  
worshipped)  but Allah,  the One and Only,  other  than Whom  there  is no partner:  
His is the dominion,  and to him be praise;  He brings  to life as well as He brings  
to death,  and He is Ever-Living  Who never  dies; in His Hand  is good,  and He 
has power  over  all things."  The second  is his saying:  "Glory  be to Allah;  Praise  be 
to Allah;  There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah;  and Allah  is Greater,  and 
there is neither  might  nor power  but with Allah,  Most  High,  Most Great."  The 
third statement  is his saying:  Exalted  and Hallowed  be (Allah)  Lord of the angels  
and the (Holy)  Spirit."  The fourth  is his saying:  Exalted  be Allah,  Most Great  
with Whose  Praises  (I exalt  Him)."  The fifth is his saying:  "I pray for Forgiveness  
of Allah,  Most Great,  Ever-Living,  Self-Subsisting,  Eternal,  other than Whom  
there  is no god (to be worshipped),  and I ask Him to turn to me in repentance."  
The sixth is his saying:  "None  could  withhold  what You give, and none could  
give what  You withhold,  and nothing  could  avail even the luckiest  and the most  
fortunate  (among  the people)  without  You."  The seventh  is his saying:  "There  is 
no god (to be worshipped)  but You, the Sovereign,  the Evident  Truth."  The 
eighth  is his saying:  "In the Name  of Allah with Whose  Name  nothing  on the 
earth or in the heaven  could  cause  any harm,  and He is (Allah)  All-Hearing,  Full 
of Knowledge."  The ninth  is his saying:  "O Allah!  send Your  Prayer,  Blessing  and 
Peace upon Muhammad,  Your servant,  Prophet  and Messenger,  the unlettered  
Prophet,  and upon  his family  and companions."  The tenth  is his saying:  "I seek  
refuge  with Allah,  All-Hearing,  All-Knowing  from Satan, the despised.  O my 
Lord! I seek refuge  with You from the evil suggestions  of Satans,  and I seek  
refuge  with You O my Lord lest they would come near me." (Al-Mu'minun  
97:98)639
i Q o' y) 9'}^  c^iJyy'yj
If one recites  each of those ten statements  ten times,  making  a total of one 
hundred  times, it will be better  for him than to recite only one of them one 
hundred  times, for each of those statements  has its independent  excellence  
(which  might  not be in the other),  and the state of pleasure  and stimulation  in 
which  the heart  becomes  because  of each of them differs  from one to the other,  
as well as the soul takes rest and feels secure  from boredom  in different  ways  
while  moving  from  one statement  to another.
As for the recitation  (of the Holy  Qur'an),  it is desirable  for one to recite  many  
Holy Verses,  whose excellence  is so much great according  to the different  
narrations.  Let him recite  the Surah  of the Praise  (i.e. Al-Fatihah),  the Holy  Verse  
of the Throne,  the two concluding  Verses  of Al-Baqarah,  in addition  to the 
following  two Holy  Verses  from A1 Imran:  " There  is no god but He: that is the 
witness  of Allah,  His angels,  and those  endued  with knowledge,  standing  firm on 
justice.  There  is no god but He the Exalted  in Power,  the Wise."  (A1 Imran  18)
i ((f5 X ^ U/ll jlj ^Jlj  y* X 'i Mil 4&T u_gJL ^
And: " Say: "O Allah!  Lord of Power  (and Rule),  You give Power  to whom  
You please,  and You stripe  off Power  from  whom  You please:  You endue  with


Page 642:
640 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
honour  whom  You please,  and You bring  low whom  You please:  in Your  hand  is 
all Good.  Verily,  over  all things  You have  power."  (A1 Imran  26)
Juj i iLi <J Jxjj c Lui '3-1LJ  I c Uu5 ^jA dXLJ  I vilL-M  dJJ±j» I
4 3*
Let him also recite  the saying  of Allah  Almighty:  " Now  has come  unto you a 
Messenger  from amongst  yourselves:  it grieves  him that you should  perish:  
ardendy  anxious  is he over you: to the Believers  is he most kind and merciful."  
(At-Tawbah  128)
And: " Truly  did Allah  fulfill  the vision  for His Messenger:  you shall enter  the 
Sacred  Mosque,  if Allah wills, with minds  secure,  heads shaved,  hair cut short,  
and without  fear. For He knew  what  you knew  not, and He granted,  besides  this,  
a speedy  victory."  (Al-Fath  27)
jolt ftLti ^)] I jJU b btjJI *JI  (3-Cyo
✓ ' ** * s
4. ({Jj W<A Oj-5 ^ L ^1x3 ^ JpjyvkL-J
And: " Say: "Praise  be to Allah,  Who begets  no son, and has no partner  in 
(His) dominion:  nor (needs)  He any to protect  Him from  humiliation:  yea, glorify  
Him for His greatness  and glory!""  (Al-Isra'  111)
J Cr? tJ3 -^3 •»<! >*^3 ' JbJ <S aH a-lil-T  Jij ^
4 ©
Let him also recite  the first five Holy  Verses  of Al-Hadid,  and the concluding  
three  of the Surah  of Al-Hashr.
Furthermore,  if one likes to complete  the excellence,  and join the good  merits  
of all the mentioned  supplications  and invocations,  let him recite  the ten seven-  
repeated  things,  presented  by Al-Khadir  "Peace  be upon him" to Ibrahim  At- 
Taimi "Allah's  Mercy  be upon him". In this connection,  it is narrated  on the 
authority  of Kurz  Ibn Wabarah  and he was one of the Substitutes  (Abdal)  that he 
said: My brother  from the inhabitants  of Sham  came  to me and gave me a present  
and said: "O Kurz!  Accept  this present  from  me, and how excellent  this present  
is!" I asked him: "O my brother!  Who has given you this present?"  he said:  
"Ibrahim  At-Taimi  has given it to me." I asked him: "Have you not asked  
Ibrahim  At-Taimi  who had given  it to him?"  he told that he said: "I was sitting  in 
the courtyard  of the Ka'bah,  in a state of celebrating  the Praises  of Allah  exalting  
and affirming  Allah's  Oneness,  when  a man came  to me: he paid salutation  to me 
and sat on my right side. I've never  seen,  in all of my lifetime,  a man of prettier  
face, more  elegant  dress,  whiter  complexion  and more  pleasant  perfume  than his. 
I asked him: "O servant  of Allah! who are you? And from where  have you


Page 643:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions  -------------------------
come?"  he said: "I'm Al-Khadir."  I asked him: "Then,  why have you 
me?" he said: "I've come  to pay salutation  to you and because  of my love for you 
in (the religion  of) Allah  Almighty;  and I further  have a present  which  I like to 
give to you." I asked  him: "What  is it?" he said: "It is to say each of the following  
seven  times,  before  the sun rises and spreads  its light upon  the earth,  and before  
it sets: the Surah of the Praise  (i.e. Al-Fatihah),  "Say: He is Allah,  the One and 
Only",  "Say: I seek refuge  with (Allah)  the Lord  of Daybreak",  "Say: I seek refuge  
with (Allah)  the Lord of Mankind",  "Say: O you who reject  faith",  in addition  to 
the Holy  Verse  of the Throne;  and to say seven  times:  Exalted  be Allah;  Praise  be 
to Allah;  There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah;  and Allah  is Greater";  to 
invoke  for Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon the Prophet  "Peace  be upon him"  
seven times; to pray seven times for Allah's  Forgiveness  for yourself,  your  
parents,  the faithful  believers,  male and female;  and to say seven  times:  "O Allah!  
do with myself  as well as with them, sooner  and later, in the religion,  the 
hereafter  and this world,  that for which  You are fitting,  and do not do with us, O 
our Lord,  that which  we deserve:  You are Oft-Forgiving,  Most  Forbearing,  Most  
Generous,  Most  Bounteous,  Most  Compassionate,  Most  Merciful."  Therefore,  be 
eager  not to leave that every  morning  and evening."  I asked  him: "But I like that 
you should  tell me: who has given you this great gift?" he said: "Muhammad  
"Peace  be upon  him" has given  it to me." I said to him: "Then,  tell me about  the 
reward  of that." He said: "When  you meet Muhammad  "Peace  be upon  him" (in 
your  dream)  ask him about  the reward  of that, and he would  tell you."
Ibrahim  At-Taimi  told that one day, he saw in his dream  as if the angels  visited  
him, and carried  him until they made him enter the Garden  and saw what it 
contained,  and he described  many  great  things  of what  he had seen in the Garden  
and then he said: "I asked  the angels:  "Whose  is all of that?"  they said: "It belongs  
to him who does the like of your  deed.""  He further  mentioned  that he had eaten  
of the fruits  of the Garden,  and that they had given  him of its drink.  He resumed:  
"Then,  the Prophet  "Peace  be upon  him" came  to me, in the company  of seventy  
rows of angels,  each was as long as is the distance  between  East and West. He 
paid me salutation  and took hold of my hand.  I said: "O Messenger  of Allah!  Al- 
Khadir  told me that he had heard from you this tradition."  He said: "Al-Khadir  
has told the truth.  Al-Khadir  has told the truth.  All that he relates  is true, and he 
is the most  knowledgeable  of the inhabitants  of the earth,  and he is the chief  of 
the Substitutes  (Abdi),  and he is one of the soldiers  of Allah  Almighty  on earth."  
I said: "O Messenger  of Allah!  what  about  him who does the like of that deed  but 
does not see you in his dream:  should  he be given anything  of what I've been  
given?"  he said: "By Him Who has sent me as a Prophet  with the truth: he who  
does the like of that deed even though  he does see neither  me nor the Garden  in 
his dream  will be given (a great  reward  according  to which)  Allah  Almighty  shall  
forgive  for him such of the major  sins as he has committed,  remove  from him 
His Wrath  and Anger,  and order the angel of the left side not to write any sin 
against  him for the whole  year to come.  By Him Who has sent me as a Prophet  
with the truth:  none  but he whom  Allah  Almighty  created  as happy  does the like641icome to
I


Page 644:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
of that deed,  and none  but he whom  Allah  Almighty  created  as wretched  leaves  
it."" However,  Ibrahim  At-Taimi  was reported  to have remained  about four  
months  with neither  food nor drink,  and this might  have happened  after this 
vision.
This is the duty of recitation.  It will be good either  to add to that one's daily  
portion  of the Holy Qur'an,  or to be satisfied  with that, since the Holy Qur'an  
joins the good merits  of both celebration  (of Allah's  Praises  and Glories)  and 
meditation  (on Allah's  Signs)  and supplication  and invocation,  particularly  when  it 
is recited  with reflection  and attention  as we've mentioned  its excellence  and 
proprieties  in the chapter  of recitation.
As far as contemplation  is concerned,  let that (which  we've  mentioned  in the 
previous  paragraph)  be one of its duties;  and we shall discuss  in detail,  Allah  
Willing,  the objects  and ways of contemplation,  in the Book  of Meditation  which  
is one of the quarter  of the saviors.  But anyway,  its main categories  might  be 
included  in two:
One is that one should  contemplate  on such of treatment  as might  be a source  
of benefit  to him: let him, for instance,  put himself  to account  for what he has 
done,  and the extent  to which  he has indulged  in his work,  and then arrange  his 
jobs during  this day of his, and try, as much  as he could,  to avert what might  
hinder  or divert  him from doing  good, and remember  his indulgence  and the 
defect  in his work  to which  it has led, perchance  he would  recover  it, and bring  
about  in his heart  the good  intention  he should  have in his works,  in relation  to 
himself  as well as in his treatment  of the Muslims.642
The other  pertains  to what  might  be a source  of benefit  to him in the science  
of Revelation:  in this issue, he might  contemplate  once on the Blessings  and 
Favours  of Allah Almighty,  His Evident  and Hidden  Signs, in order that he 
would become  more acquainted  with them, and more thankful  (to Allah  
Almighty)  for them;  and once on Allah's  Punishment  and Wrath  in order  that he 
would come to have better knowledge  of the extent of the Power and 
independence  of god, thereupon  he would  become  more  fearful  of it.
However,  each of both has so many  branches  and subjects,  in which  there  is 
disparity  of reflection  among  the people,  which  we shall discuss  in more  detail  in 
the Book  of Contemplation.  Once the contemplation  is available,  it will be the 
most honourable  of the acts of worship,  since it implies  the significance  of the 
remembrance  (and celebration  of the Praises  and Glories)  of Allah  Almighty,  in 
addition  to two further  things  of importance:  one is the increase  of knowledge,  
since the contemplation  is the main key of knowledge  and disclosure;  and the 
other  is the increase  of love, since the heart  could  hardly  have love but for those  
who thought  of as the object  of exaltation,  and in no way could the Greatness  
and Majesty  of Allah Almighty  be divulged  but through  the knowledge  of His 
Attributes,  Power  and inimitable  acts. In this way, the meditation  leads to 
knowledge,  and knowledge  leads  to exaltation,  and exaltation,  in turn,  leads  to the 
love.
It is true that the celebration  (of the Praises  and Glories  of Allah)  gives  rise to


Page 645:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions  
affability,  which  is in itself  a kind of love, but the love which  is obtained  from  
knowledge  is much stronger,  more constant  and well-established.  However,  the 
relation  of the love which  a Gnostic  has to the love which  the celebrating  one 
experiences  without  having  full acquaintance  (with the object  of love) is like the 
relation  of the adoration  of him who sees with his own eyes the beauty  of 
somebody,  and is acquainted,  through  direct  experience,  with his good manners,  
acts, merits and praiseworthy  qualities,  to the affability  of him who hears a 
general  description  of the good qualities  and characteristics  of somebody  who is 
absent  from his eyes, without  giving  any details  about  the points  of such good.  
Of a surety,  the affection  which  the latter feels is not (as strong  and impressive)  
as the adoration  which the viewer  experiences,  since by no means  could the 
(influence  of the) news  be like (that  of) watching.
Similarly,  the servants  who are regular  in their  remembrance  of Allah  Almighty  
with their hearts  and tongues,  and have traditional  trust and faith in what was 
brought  by the Messengers  and Prophets,  do not have of the knowledge  of the 
attributes  of Allah Almighty  more than good things in which they believe  by 
giving  trust to those  who have described  them.  But it is the Gnostics  who  witness  
the Glory  and Beauty  (of Allah Almighty)  with the light of their deep internal  
insight,  which  is much  stronger  than the evident  sight. But, none could  grasp  the 
essence  and nature  of His Glory  and Beauty,  which  is not within  the power  of 
anyone  of the creatures;  and everyone  sees only as much  as is in proportion  to 
such of veils as is removed  before  him. As well as the Beauty  of the Presence  of 
Lordship  is infinite,  the veils which  surround  it are also endless.  But the number  
of the veils which  are worthy  of acquiring  the name  of Light  are seventy,  and it is 
those which,  if one reaches,  he would  think he has reached  the origin.  In this 
connection  it is narrated  that The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  
be upon him" said: "Verily,  Allah Almighty  has seventy  veils of light, and were  
He to remove  them, the Majesty  and Glory  of His Countenance  would  burn  
whatever  His Sight  reaches."
Those  veils are arranged  according  to their difference,  and those lights are 
different  in their rank in the same way as are the sun, the moon  and the other  
stars: the smallest  of them seems  at first, followed  by that which  is bigger  and so 
on. It is on the ground  of this notion  that one of the Sufis  interprets  the different  
ranks which seemed  to Abraham,  Allah's  Bosom  Friend  in his promotion  (to 
attain the truth of Lordship),  as shown  from Allah's  saying:  " When  the night  
covered  him over"  i.e. when  the matter  became  very dark and abstruse  upon  him,  
"he saw a star" i.e. he attained  one of the veils of light referred  to herein  by the 
star. (Al-An'am  76)643
JU
>-\ y Jli Lib ijj '-La Jli Uj aIIp [y>- ills ^
However,  it is not the radiant  celestial  bodies  that is intended  here, for indeed,  
it is not hidden  from the laymen  that it is not consonant  with the Majesty  of 
Lordship  to be referred  to by such bodies,  a fact which  they know  from  the first 
sight; and of a surety,  what misleads  naught  the laymen  was not to mislead


Page 646:
644 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
Abraham,  the Bosom  Friend  "Peace  be upon him". Furthermore,  by the Veils  
which  are called Lights,  it is not that light which  is visible  by the eye that is 
intended:  on the contrary,  what  is intended  is the same  which  is intended  by the 
statement  of Allah Almighty:  "Allah  is the Light  of the heavens  and the earth.  
The parable  of His Light  is as if there were a Niche  and within  it a Lamp:  the 
Lamp  enclosed  in Glass;  the glass as it were a brilliant  star: lit from a blessed  
Tree, an Olive,  neither  of the East nor of the West, whose  Oil is well-nigh  
luminous,  though  fire scarce touched  it: Light upon Light! Allah does guide  
whom  He will to His Light:  Allah  does set forth  Parables  for men: and Allah  does  
know  all things."  (An-Nur  35)
lip 6"" 4_>- 10-j) I j A.J I ^Lya  » tpd SjSCJLoS*  C-Ojy  (JjL* JI jy I 0
jy JJ jlj Hfjj ^ y~0 ^y
i ^ ^13 Si &
But, it is better  for us to leave  those  meanings,  which  are beyond  the science  
of practical  religion  (and rather  belong  to the science  of Revelation),  whose  facts  
could  not be attained  except  by way of revelation  which  is available  only to the 
pure  thought  of those  who have its gates  opened  to them.  But what  is available  to 
the public  is their meditation  on that which benefits  them in the science  of 
practical  religion,  whose  advantage  is so much,  and whose  profit  is great.
Those  four jobs,  i.e. the invocation,  the celebration  (of the Praises  and Glories  
of Allah Almighty),  the recitation  (of the Holy Qur'an)  and the meditation  (of 
Allah's  Signs  and Dominion)  should  be the main  work  of the follower  of the path  
after the Morning  prayer,  if not in each regular  division  after the finishing  from  
the duty of (obligatory)  prayer,  since there is no job (to be done) after (the 
obligatory)  prayer  other than those four. Let him support  himself  by taking  his 
weapon  and shield;  and of a surety,  fasting  acts as the shield  which  makes  narrow  
the circulations  of Satan,  the aggressive  one, who is fitting  to divert  him from the 
right  way.
Nevertheless,  after the crack of dawn,  till the rising of the sun, there is no 
prayer  to be offered  other  than the two-rak'ah  prayer  prior to Fajr and the two-  
rak'ah  obligatory  prayer  of Morning.  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon him" and his companions  used to engage  themselves  in this 
period  in the celebration  (of the Glories  and Praises  of Allah),  and it is more  
proper  until he would be overpowered  by slumber  before performing  the 
obligation,  and nothing  except  the prayer  could  prompt  him (to wake up). So, if 
he offers  prayer  for that reason,  there  will be no harm.
The second  regular  division  lies in the period  between  the rising  of the sun 
and forenoon,  and by forenoon  I mean  the middle  time between  sunrise  and sun 
decline,  or in other  words,  when  three  hours,  which  constitute  the first quarter  of 
daylight  pass on the ground  of the fact that daylight  is of twelve  hours  (as well as 
the night is of twelve  hours).  There are two more duties in this quarter  of 
daylight:1


Page 647:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions
One is the Forenoon  prayer  which  we've mentioned  earlier  in the Book of 
Prayer.  It is to pray at first two rak'ahs  just when  sun rises and spreads  out and 
becomes  as high as half a spear,  and then prayer  further  four, six or eight when  
the sun becomes  too hot for the weaning  camels  to endure  and the sand too 
scorching  for the feet to bear.
It is the time of the first two rak'ahs  (when  sun rises) which  is intended  by 
Allah's  statement:  " It was We that made the hills declare,  in unison  with him,  
Our Praises,  at evendde  and at break  of day." (Sad 18)
i (Q)0!>W'j  /aZ 'jciJ  byLl  bl }
It is really the time of sunrise,  in which  its light emerges  in full perfection,  
when it goes up over the level of earth's  fogs and molecules  which  hinder  its 
rising  in full. But the time of offering  the further  four-rak'ah  prayer  is the higher  
forenoon,  by which Allah Almighty  swears  in His saying: "By the Glorious  
morning  Light,  And by the Night  when  it is still, Your Guardian-Lord  has not 
forsaken  you, nor is He displeased."  (Ad-Duha  1:3)
Furthermore,  it is narrated  that one day The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon him" came out to his companions  at the time of 
sunrise  and they were engaged  in prayer,  thereupon  he called  them at the top 
of his voice:  "Behold!  The (Forenoon)  prayer  of those  devout  in their service  
(to Allah  Almighty)  should  be when  the sun is too hot for the weaning  camels  
to bear."
For this reason,  we say that if one is limited  to one prayer,  this time will be 
more  fitting  for Forenoon  (Duha)  prayer,  even though  the excellent  superiority  is 
attained  through  offering  prayer  in the period  between  the ends of both times  of 
undesirability,  i.e. in the period  between  the rising  of the sun as high as half a 
spear  and a short  while  before  sun decline,  i.e. the midday  (when  it is vertical  over  
the meridian).  The word  Forenoon  covers  the whole  period.  In this way, the first 
two-rak'ah  prayer  of Duha are offered  in the beginning  of the time in which  
prayer  is permissible  with no undesirability,  in accordance  with the statement  of 
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him": "Verily,  sun 
rises and there emerges  with it both horns  of Satan,  and when  it becomes  high,  
Satan  leaves  it." the least height  of the sun is to rise up the level of the earth's  
fogs and molecules;  and of a surety,  this should  be observed  with approximation.
The other  duty which  is to be done during  that time is to do the goods  and 
charitable  deeds  which  are connected  with the people,  according  to the habits  
of the early morning,  such as to pay a visit to a padent  (to enquire  about  his 
health),  to follow  a funeral  procession,  to help others  do what is good and 
righteous,  to attend  a gathering  of knowledge,  to fulfill  a need of a Muslim,  and 
the like of that. If there is nothing  of all of that, let one then return  to do the 
four duties  which  we've  introduced  earlier  in this article,  i.e. the supplications,  
the celebrations  (of the Praises  and Glories  of Allah),  the recitation  (of the Holy645


Page 648:
646 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
Qur'an)  and the meditation  (on Allah's  Signs  and Dominion),  or to perform  the 
voluntary  prayers  if he so likes, which  are undesirable  just after the Morning  
prayer,  and not in that period  (of forenoon),  in which  it comes  to occupy  the 
fifth duty for him who likes to do it. But after the Morning  prayer,  each prayer  
for which  there  is no just reason  is undesirable.  Moreover,  it is more  desirable,  
after daybreak,  that one should  limit himself  to the two-rak'ah  prayer  prior to 
Fajr, in addition  to the two-rak'ah  prayer  of saluting  the mosque,  and (after  
offering  the obligation  of Fajr) not to engage himself  in prayer, but in 
supplication,  celebration  (of Allah's  Praises  and Glories),  recitation  (of the Holy  
Qur'an),  and meditation  (on Allah's  Signs,  Blessings  and Favours).
The third regular  division  lies in the period  between  the higher  forenoon  
and sun decline.  We mean by the higher  forenoon  the middle  time (between  
sunrise  and sun decline)  and a short  while  earlier:  on the basis of the command  
that a prayer  should  be offered  at the end of every three-hour  interval,  when  
three hours after sunrise  elapse,  just at that time, and before its end, the 
Forenoon  (Duha)  prayer  should  be offered,  and when  further  three  hours  elapse,  
this is the due time of Noon  (Zhuhr)  prayer,  and when  further  three  hours  elapse,  
this is the due time of Asr (Afternoon)  prayer,  and when further  three hours  
elapse,  this is the due time of Maghrib  (Sunset)  prayer.  In this way, the forenoon  
lies between  sunrise  and sun decline  in the same position  as noon lies between  
sun decline  and sunset,  except  that the Forenoon  (prayer)  has not been enjoined  
for it lies at the time during  which  the people  are involved  in their jobs and daily  
earnings;  and it is for this reason  that its enjoinment  has been removed  from  
them.  The four duties  are included  and two more  besides:
One is to engage  in daily earnings  and the management  of living  affairs,  which  
requires  one to go to the market.  If one is a merchant,  let him practice  his traffic  
with truthfulness  and honesty,  and if he is a craftsman,  let him do his profession  
with sincerity  and perfection,  provided  that in all of his jobs, he should  not forget  
the celebration  and remembrance  of Allah  Almighty,  and limit his earnings  to the 
amount  which  fulfills  his daily needs,  even though  he has power  to earn more;  
and once he gets what  is sufficient  for his very day, let him return  to the House  
of his Lord, and take provisions  for the hereafter,  since the need of taking  
provisions  for the hereafter  is stronger,  and the enjoyment  of it is more  
permanent.  So, to engage  himself  in his earnings  (for the hereafter)  is more  
important  than to seek to get what is beyond  the time needs.  It is said that the 
faithful  believer  never  exists  but in three places:  a mosque  which  he inhabits  (to 
offer  prayer  and celebrate  the Praises  of Allah),  a house  to screen  him, or (a place  
to fulfill)  a need  whose  fulfillment  is inevitable.  Few are those  who know  such  of 
amount  as is necessary  (for living):  on the contrary,  most  of the people  regard  as 
necessary  that which  is not necessary;  and that's because  Satan  always  promises  
them poverty,  and commands  them to do what is shameful,  and they pay their  
attention  to him, and gather  what is beyond  their needs for fear of destitution,  
whereas  Allah Almighty  promises  them forgiveness  and bounty  from Himself,  
but they turn away  from  Him and refrain  from  that.


Page 649:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions
The other  is to have a siesta (before  noon),  a tradition  which  is to help you 
stand at night for supererogatory  prayers,  in the same way as Suhur  (the night  
meal a short  time before  dawn)  is a tradition  to help one observe  fast during  the 
day. However,  such siesta is much  better  for him even if he does not stand at 
night for supererogatory  prayer,  but rather,  in case of remaining  sleepless,  he 
would  not do good,  and would  mix with the heedless  and is involved  in discourse  
about  falsity,  and he would  not be rejuvenated  to return  to the celebrations  (of 
Allah  Almighty)  and the other  duties  mentioned  above,  since  silence  (from  falsity)  
and safety (against  heedlessness)  lie in sleep. According  to one of the learned  
men: "A time will come  upon  the people,  the best of whose  deed  will be silence  
and sleep."
Many  are the worshippers,  whose  best state is their sleep, particularly  if the 
purpose  of his worship  is to show  off to be seen and heard  of men, in which  he 
does not prove sincere  and truthful  (to Allah Almighty):  what then about  the 
wicked  heedless?  According  to Sufyan  Ath-Thawri:  "It was alluring  to them to go 
to bed once they became  free, seeking  after safety  (from  falling  into mistakes)."  If 
the aim of his sleep is to seek safety  and enable  himself  to stand at night for 
supererogatory  prayers,  his sleep will then be an act of worship.  But he should  
wake up a short time before  the sun decline,  enough  for him to get ready for 
Zhuhr  prayer,  i.e. to allow  him to perform  ablution  and enter  the mosque  before  
the due time of prayer  comes,  since  this is one of the meritorious  deeds.
But in case he does not sleep,  nor engage  himself  in getting  his daily earnings,  
and rather  is occupied  by prayer  and celebration  (of Allah  Almighty),  this will be 
one of the best deeds  of daylight,  for it is time at which  people  become  heedless  
of (the remembrance  of) Allah  Almighty,  and engaged  in the affairs  of this world.  
To be sure, the heart which  is devoted  to the service  of the Lord at the time  
when  the servants  are turning  away from His Gate,  is fitting  for being  justified  
and purified  by Allah Almighty,  and chosen  to be close to His Presence,  and 
worthy  of His Knowledge.  The excellence  of this is like the excellence  of giving  
life to the night (by standing  for supererogatory  prayers):  as well as the night  is 
the time of heedlessness  through  sleep, the daylight  is the time of heedlessness  
through  following  desires  and lusts, and occupation  by the affairs  and vanities  of 
this world.  One side of the significance  of the statement  of Allah Almighty:  " 
And it is He Who made the Night  and the Day to follow  each other:  for those  
who have the will to celebrate  His praises  or to show  their  gratitude"  (Al-Furqan647
I
I
:62)
j**-  >3^
Is that one succeeds  the other  in excellence  and superiority,  and the other  is 
that both come  in succession,  one after the other,  in order  that one might  catch  
in any of them  what  he misses  in the other.
The fourth  regular  division  lies in the period between  sun decline  and 
finishing  from Zhuhr  prayer  and its appurtenances;  and this is the shortest  and 
the best of the regular  divisions  during  the day. If one performs  ablution  before


Page 650:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
sun decline,  and goes to the mosque,  and then the sun passes  the meridian  and 
the Mu'adhdhin  goes on pronouncing  the Call to Prayer,  let him keep patient  
until he finishes  from responding  to the Adhan,  and then let him stand  and give  
life to the interval  between  both Adhan  and Iqamah,  which  is the time of the 
beginning  of sun decline  that is intended  by Allah in His statement:  " Yea, to 
Him be praise,  in the heavens  and on earth;  and in the late afternoon  and when  
the day begins  to decline."  (Ar-Rum  18)
Just at that time, let him offer a four-rak'ah  prayer,  with no End Taslim  to 
make  break  between  them.  This is the only prayer,  from amongst  all the prayers  
of the day which  should  be offered  with one Taslim,  according  to one of the 
learned  men.  But, this narration  has been  criticized,  and according  to the doctrine  
of Shafi ’i, one should  pray them  in pairs like the other  supererogatory  four-rak'ah  
prayers,  with a Taslim  to make break between  each two. This is, however,  the 
more  authentic  narration  in this issue.  Let him prolong  those  rak'ah,  in which  the 
gates of the heaven  are opened  as we've  mentioned  in the chapter  of Voluntary  
prayers,  in which,  let him recite  either  the Surah  of Al-Baqarah,  one of the one-  
hundred-Verse  Surahs,  or four of the Oft-Repeated  Surahs.  The invocations  
receive  answer  during  those  hours.  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace be upon him" liked to have his deeds raised for him up to the heaven  
during  that time.
After  performing  four long, as we've  referred  to earlier,  or even short  rak'ahs  
which  one should  not leave, let him offer Zhuhr  prayer  in congregation,  after  
which he should  pray two rak'ahs,  followed  by four, for indeed,  Ibn Mas'ud  
disliked  that one should  follow  the obligatory  prayer  with its like of rak'ahs  
without  a break  (of different  number  of rak'ahs)  between  them.  It is desirable  to 
recite in this supererogatory  prayers the Holy Verse of the Throne,  the 
concluding  Holy Verses  of Al-Baqarah,  in addition  to the Holy Verses  which  
we've mentioned  in the first regular  division,  in order that he would  combine  
Du'a (supplication),  Dhikr (celebration),  recitation,  prayer,  Tasbih  and Tahmid  
during  one of the most  honourable  times.
The fifth regular  division  lies in the period  which  begins  from the time of 
finishing  from all of that until the time of Asr prayer,  during  which  it is desirable  
to stay in the mosque,  and engage  in prayer  and celebration  (of Allah's  Praises),  or 
in different  good acts, and remain  in seclusion  in expectation  for the prayer,  for 
one of the good and meritorious  deeds is to remain (in the mosque)  in 
expectation  for the coming  prayer  after finishing  from the current  prayer.  This  
was the traditional  practice  of the early men. One used to enter the mosque  
during  the period  between  Zhuhr  and Asr, and hear the sounds  of the praying  
men like the sounds  of bees resulting  from their recitation.  But if his house  is 
safer for his religion,  and more helpful  to make  him bring  about  the strength  of 
his mind,  it will be better  for him to stay in his house.  Therefore,  the excellence  
of giving  life to this regular  division  during  that time in which  the people  are648


Page 651:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions  ----------
heedless  is like that of giving  life to the third regular  division.
At that time, sleep  is undesirable  particularly  for him who has taken  his siesta  
before  sun decline,  on the basis  of the fact that to sleep  two times  during  the time  
of daylight  is undesirable.  According  to a learned  man: "Allah  Almighty  hates  
three things:  to laugh with no just cause,  to eat without  being hungry,  and to 
sleep during  the daylight  without  spending  the night  wakeful."  The due limit of 
sleep  during  every  night-and-day  turn of twenty-four  hours  is no more  than eight  
ours during  both night  and day: if he sleeps  all at night,  there  is no just cause  for 
his sleep more  during  the day, and as much  as he decreases  from that amount  at 
night, let him sleep during  the day. It is sufficient  for a sixty-year-old  man to 
decrease  twenty  years of his lifetime;  and if he sleeps  eight hours  per night and 
day, i.e. one-third  the hours  of night  and day, a third of his age would  be reduced  
from  his life.
But as well as sleep acts as the sustenance  of spirit,  in the same  way as food is 
the nourishment  of the body,  and both knowledge  and celebration  (of the Praises  
and Glories  of Allah Almighty)  the nourishment  of both heart and mind, one 
could  not cease  to sleep.  Moreover,  the due limit of sleep is this amount  (of eight  
hours  daily),  and if it is reduced,  this might  put the body  to trouble,  barring  him 
who is gradually  accustomed  to spend the night wakeful,  and thus he might  
receive  no trouble  (by decreasing  the hours  of his sleep from  eight  hours).  This is 
the longest  regular  divisions  and the most enjoyable  to the servants,  whose  time  
is intended  by Allah's  statement:  " Whatever  beings  there are in the heavens  and 
the earth do prostrate  themselves  to Allah (acknowledging  subjection)  - with  
good-will  or in spite of themselves  - so do their shadows  in the mornings  and 
evenings."  (Ar-Ra'd  15)
4 © * jUi  SMj (Hl'lkj 4 cr* ^
If the non-living  beings prostrate  themselves  in subjection  to Allah, how  
should  a rational  servant  be heedless  of doing  the acts of worship?
The sixth  regular  division  begins  with the coming  of Asr time, and it is by 
this portion  of time that Allah  Almighty  swears  in His saying:  "By (the Token  of) 
Time  of eventide,  Verily  Man is in loss." (Al-Asr  1:2)
4 Oj 0yva*jTj  }
This is one of the two meanings  given  to this saying,  as well as it is intended  
by the evenings  according  to one of the two interpretations  given to this Holy  
Verse  (Ar-Ra'd  15)
4 © * p-fhihj  iv/j ^3^13  9'iuUl  4 4A)j 5>
And it is also intended  by His saying:  "It was We that made  the hills declare,  in 
unison  with him, Our Praises,  at eventide  and at break  of day." (Sad 18)
There  is no prayer  to be offered  in this regular  division  other than the four-649
4 isrr^t


Page 652:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
rak'ah  prayer  in the interval  between  both Adhan  and Iqamah  (of Asr), as we've  
mentioned  earlier  pertaining  to Zhuhr  prayer.  Then,  let one offer the obligatory  
prayer  after  which  let him engage  in the four duties  which  we've  explained  earlier  
in the first regular  division  until the sun rises up to the tops of walls,  and turns  
yellow.  Since  prayer  at that time is forbidden,  it is better  to recite  the Holy  Qur'an  
attentively  and assiduously,  for this (kind of recitation,  which  is one of the four  
duties)  combines  (the other  three  of) supplication,  celebration  (of Allah's  Praises)  
and meditation.  That's  because,  in this duty,  nearly  all the objectives  and purposes  
of the other  three  are included.
The seventh  regular  division  begins  when  the sun turns  yellow  and becomes  
so close to the earth that its light covers  the molecules  and fogs which  are over  
the surface  of the earth,  and yellowness  is visible  in its light. This regular  division  
is similar  to the first one, which  lies in the period  between  daybreak  and sunrise,  
because  the former  is before  sunset,  as well as the latter  is before  sunrise.  It is this 
that is intended  by Allah's  statement:  " So (give) glory to Allah,  when  you reach  
eventide  and when  you rise in the morning."  (Ar-Rum  17)
This is also the other  side (of the day) that is intended  by Allah's  statement:  " 
yea, celebrate  them for part of the hours  of the night,  and at the sides of the day: 
that you may have (spiritual)  joy." (Ta Ha 130)
According  to Al-Hassan,  they used to exalt the eventide  more than the first  
portion  of the morning.  According  to one of the early men: They  used to assign  
the first portion  of the morning  to the (earnings  and affairs  of) this world,  and its 
last portion  to the hereafter.  It is desirable,  in this regular  division,  to engage  in 
Tasbih  and Istighfar  (prayer  for Allah's  Forgiveness),  in addition  to all that we've  
mentioned  in the first regular  division  such as: "I pray for the Forgiveness  of 
Allah Almighty  other than Whom  there is no god (to be worshipped),  Ever-  
Living,  Self-Subsisting,  Eternal,  to Whom  I turn in repentance"  and Exalted  be 
Allah,  Most  Great,  with Whose  Praise  (I exalt Him)."  This is taken from Allah's  
saying:  "so pray for forgiveness  for your sin, and celebrate  the Praises  of your  
Lord  in the evening  and in the morning."  (Ghafir  55)
4 ^
It is more  desirable  to pray for forgiveness  by the same  names  which  are in the 
Qur'an,  such as: "I pray for Allah's  Forgiveness:  He is the One Who forgives  
again and again"  and: "I pray for Allah's  Forgiveness:  He is Oft-Returning",  "O 
my Lord: forgive  (my sins) and bestow  mercy upon me: You are the Most  
Merciful  of those  who show  mercy",  "O our Lord! Forgive  for us our sins and 
bestow  mercy upon us, for You are the Most Merciful  of those who show  
mercy",  "O our Lord!  Forgive  for us our sins and bestow  mercy  upon  us, for You  
are the Most  ready  to forgive  (sins)",  and the like of that.650


Page 653:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions
Moreover,  it is desirable  to recite,  before  sunset,  such Surahs  as: "By the Sun 
and its (glorious)  splendour"  (Ash-Shams  1)651
40 ^
"By the Night  as it conceals  (the light)"  (Al-Lail  1)
In addition  to both Surahs  of seeking  refuge  (with Allah from the evil of 
Satan).  Let the sun set on one while he is engaged  in his prayer  for Allah's  
Forgiveness,  and once he hears  the Call to Maghrib  prayer,  let him say: "O Allah!  
this is the beginning  of Your  night,  which  is, at the same  time, the ending  of Your  
daylight,  and (those  are) the voice of people  who invoke  You and attend  Your  
prayers:  I ask You to forgive  for me." Then,  let him respond  to the Mu'adhdhin,  
and engage  in performing  Maghrib  prayer.
With sunset,  the regular  divisions  of daylight  will have come to end. So, a 
servant  should  observe  his states,  and put himself  to account,  on the ground  that 
a stage  will have passed  of his way (of life): if his current  is equal to his last day, 
he will be a loser,  and if it is worse  than it, he will be cursed.  The Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "Blessed  naught  be I in a 
day, in which  I do not increase  in good."  If he finds himself  in the habit  of doing  
good during  the whole  of his day, in which  he refrains  from evil, let him then  
rejoice  (and receive  the glad tidings  of being  on the right),  because  of which  he 
should  give thanks  to Allah  Almighty,  for He has helped  him succeed  on his way 
(to the hereafter);  otherwise,  (let him know  that) the night  comes  to succeed  the 
day (in excellence):  so, let him be strong  and firm in his decision  to substitute  that 
in which  he has indulged  during  the day, having  the assurance  that the good  
deeds  always  remove  the evil deeds.
Let him also give thanks  to Allah  Almighty  for providing  him with power  and 
health,  and life during  his night, to enable  him to engage  in substituting  that 
which  he has missed.  Let him put in mind the fact that the day of his lifetime  
should  inevitably  come to end, with which  the sun of his life should  set, after  
which  it shall never  rise once again, and it is just at this time that the gate of 
substitution  and excuse  shall be closed  forever,  for indeed,  one's lifetime  is but a 
number  of counted  days,  which  should  all be inevitably  spent  when  they pass one 
by one.
The Exposition  Of The Night  Regular  Divisions
Those  are five, and they  go as follows:
The first regular  division  begins  when sun sets, and one offers Maghrib  
prayer,  and then engages  in giving  life to the period  between  both prayers  of 
evening.  The end of that regular  division  is at the time of the disappearance  of 
the glow of twilight,  i.e. the ruddy  glow  of sunset,  with whose  disappearance  the 
time of Isha' prayer,  by which  Allah  Almighty  swears  in His saying:  "So I do call 
to witness  the ruddy  glow  of Sunset."  (Al-Inshiqaq  16)


Page 654:
The quarter  of the acts of worship 652
4 p-T3’ ^ ^
The prayer  therein  is a prayer  in the rising by night, for it lies in its first 
portion.  It is one of the parts (of the night)  referred  to by Allah  in His statement:  
"yea,  celebrate  them  for part of the hours  of the night."  (Ta Ha 130)
The prayer  therein  also is the prayer  of those  who are devout  in their service  
(to Allah Almighty),  to whom  Allah Almighty  refers  in His statement:  " Their  
limbs  do forsake  their  beds of sleep,  the while  they call on their Lord,  in Fear  and 
Hope."  (As-Sajdah  16)
This is narrated  on the authority  of Al-Hassan,  and attributed  by Ibn Abu  
Ziyad  to The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" that 
he was asked  about  this Holy  Verse,  thereupon  he said: "It refers  to the prayer  in 
the interval  between  both Evening  prayers  (i.e. Maghrib  and Isha')."  Then he 
resumed:  "Stick  you to the performance  of prayer  between  both Evening  prayers  
(i.e. Maghrib  and Isha 1), since it removes  the falsities  one might  commit  during  
the day, and revises  its end."  When  Anas  was asked  about  him who sleeps  in the 
period  between  both Evening  prayers,  he said: "Do not do so, for it is the very  
hour  intended  by Allah's  saying:  " Their  limbs  do forsake  their beds of sleep,  the 
while  they call on their  Lord,  in Fear and Hope."  (As-Sajdah  16)
4 yrJ £>-L^-Ln  ^ ^
However,  the excellence  of giving  life to the period  between  both Evening  
prayers  will be discussed  later  in the second  chapter  (of this book).
The sequence  of the items  of this regular  division  goes as follows:  one should,  
after Maghrib  prayer,  offer a two-rak'ah  prayer,  in which  he recites  "Say: O you 
who reject faith" and: "Say: He is Allah,  One and Only",  which  he should  offer  
just after  Maghrib  prayer,  with no speech  or job to interrupt  them.  Then,  let him 
offer  a four-rak'ah  prayer,  which  he should  prolong.  Then,  let him pray as much  
as he could  until the disappearance  of the ruddy  glow  of twilight.  If the mosque  is 
near the house,  there is no blame  upon him to offer those  prayers  in his home,  
particularly  in case he has no intention  to stay (in expectation  for the coming  
prayer)  in the mosque.  But it is better  if he intends  to stay in the mosque  in 
expectation  for the Isha' prayer,  as long as he will be safe from the suspicion  of 
ostentation  and showing  off to be seen of men.
The second  regular  division  begins  when the time of Isha' prayer  comes,  
and the people  go to bed. This is the first portion  of the overwhelming  darkness.  
It is by this time that Allah  Almighty  swears  in His saying:  "and (by) The Night  
and its Homing"  (Al-Inshiqaq  17)
4 JJ13


Page 655:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions
I.e. with its full darkness.  Allah Almighty  further  says: "Establish  regular  
prayers  at the sun's decline  till the darkness  of the night."  (Al-Isra'  78)
4 Cjj 5^p jj 4} ojivi lT^  I ^
At that time, it becomes  very dark, to the extent  that its darkness  wholly  
covers  up the universe.
The items  of this regular  division  are arranged  in three parts: the first is that,  
besides  the obligatory  prayer  of Isha, one should  pray ten rak'ahs,  four of which  
before  the obligatory  prayer  (of Isha 1), to give life to the interval  between  both  
Adhan  and iqamah,  and six after the obligatory  prayer: two independendv,  
followed  by four, in which  he should  recite from the Holy Qur'an  such special  
Holy Verses  as the concluding  Verses  of Al-Baqarah,  the Holy Verse of the 
Throne,  the starting  Verses  of Al-Hadid,  the concluding  Verses  of Al-Hashr,  and 
the like of them.
The second  is to pray thirteen  rak'ahs,  the last of which is the Witr, for 
according  to so many  narrations,  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" used to pray them  during  the night.  The mindful  offer them  
at the first portion  of the night,  and the powerful  at the last portion,  even though  
it is more  resolute  to perform  them  earlier,  for one might  not be able to wake  up, 
or might  fall asleep  so much  deeply  that it becomes  hard upon  him to stand  (for 
night  prayer).  But if standing  (at night)  becomes  habitual  to him, then, (to wake  
up and offer the night  supererogatory  prayers  at) the last portion  of the night is 
better.  In those prayers,  let him recite as many as three hundred  Holy Verses,  
from the particular  Surahs,  which  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" used to recite  most frequently,  such as Ya Sin, Luqman,  Ad- 
Dukhan,  AJ-Mulk,  Az-Zumar,  Al-Waqi'ah,  etc.
If he does not pray, he should  not leave the recitation  of all or most  of those  
Surahs  before  he goes to bed. Three Prophetic  traditions  are narrated  in this 
respect,  according  to which  the most famous  Surahs  which  The Messenger  of 
Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" used to recite most frequently,  
Luqman,  Al-Mulk,  Az-Zumar,  Al-Waqi'ah,  Al-Isra'  according  to another  
version,  and according  to a third narration,  he used to recite every night the 
Surahs  which  begins  with the celebration  of the Glories  of Allah,  and say that in 
them,  there  is a certain  Holy  Verse,  whose  recitation  is better  than one thousand.  
Some  learned  men raised them to six, adding  " Exalt the Name  of Your Lord,  
Most  High",  for according  to a certain  narration,  The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  
blessing  and peace be upon him" used to like " Exalt the Name  of your Lord,  
Most  High".  Moreover,  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be 
upon  him" used to recite  in the three rak'ahs  of Witr: " Exalt  the Name  of your  
Lord,  Most  High",  "Say: O you who reject  faith"  and "Say: He is Allah,  One and 
Only"; and when he finished  he would say thrice: Exalted  be (Allah) the 
Sovereign,  the Holy  One."
The third is the performance  of Witr prayer.  Let one offer the Witr prayer  
before  he goes to bed if standing  (at night) is not habitual  to him. In this653
are


Page 656:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
connection,  it is narrated  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  that he said: The  
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" advised  me not to 
sleep before  I should  offer the Witr prayer."  But if the performance  of prayer  at 
night  is customary  to him, it is better  for him to offer it late. The Messenger  of 
Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "The  night  (supererogatory)  
prayer  should  be offered  in pairs,  and if you fear the (time of) Morning  (prayer)  
might  overtake  you, offer  a rak'ah  to conclude  your  prayer."
It is narrated  on the authority  of A'ishah  "Allah  be pleased  with her" that she 
said: "The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him"  
sometimes  offered  Witr prayer  at the first portion  of the night,  sometimes  at its 
middle  portion,  and sometimes  at its last portion;  and the latest  hour  at which  he 
offered  Witr prayer  was a short  while  before  dawn."  According  to Ali "Allah  be 
pleased  with him": "There  are three  ways of offering  Witr prayer:  if you so like,  
you might  offer  Witr prayer  with an odd number  of rak'ahs  at the first portion  of 
the night,  and then you might  pray such of pairs of rak'ahs  as you like (he means  
it would  be regarded  as Witr to conclude  only what  is prior to it), and if you so 
like, you might  offer a single  rak'ah  for Witr, and when you get up, you might  
make  it an even number  by another  rak'ah  and then offer  Witr prayer  at the last 
portion  of the night;  and if you so like, you might  delay  offering  the Witr prayer  
with an odd number  of rak'ahs  to the last portion  of the night,  in order  to be the 
conclusion  of all of your  daily  prayer."
From  amongst  what  is narrated  from  him, both  the first and the third  ways  are 
good. But as to repeal  the concluding  odd number  of rak'ahs  (according  to the 
second  way),  it is forbidden  by an authentic  narration;  and so, it should  not be 
repealed.  It is narrated,  with no restriction,  that The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  
blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "None  should  offer Witr with an odd 
number  of rak'ahs  twice  on one night."  But, there  is something  nice for him who  
falters  to get up from sleep at night,  and it is good  in the sight of some  learned  
men. It is to offer,  after the concluding  odd number  of rak'ahs,  two rak'ahs  while  
sitting  on one's bed before  sleep.  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" used to move  slowly  to his bed and pray them,  in which  he 
would  recite both Surahs  of Az-Zalzalah  and At-Takathur,  in view of such of 
warnings  and threats  as they have,  or, according  to another  version,  "Say: O you 
who reject faith" for therewith  one sets himself  free (from belonging  to the 
religion  of the unbelievers),  and dedicates  his worship  sincerely  and truly to Allah  
Alone.
In this respect,  it is said that if one gets up (from  sleep at night),  those  (two  
rak'ahs  which  he has offered  while  sitting)  would  be considered  as one, to make  
even (the previously  single rak'ah  which  he has offered  as Witr) and thus he 
would  have the right to offer a single  rak'ah  for Witr at the conclusion  of the 
night  supererogatory  prayers.  By those (two rak'ahs)  what has been previously  
offered  would  be an even number  of rak'ahs,  after  which  he would  resume  the 
Witr prayer  in a good  manner.  This way was accepted  as good  by Abu Talib  Al- 
Makki,  who said: "It has three benefits:  making  short the hope,  obtaining  the654


Page 657:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions  
Witr prayer  with an odd number  of rak'ahs,  and the privilege  of performing  it at 
the last portion  of the night."  And,  of a surety,  this is true as he mentioned.
But, it might  occur to the mind the objection  that in case such two-rak'ah  
prayer  makes  even one's previous  prayers,  it will be right. But, if he does not get 
up (from  sleep at night to resume  prayer),  his first Witr with an odd number  of 
rak'ahs  then will have been invalidated.  That  it is considered  to make  even (what  
has been  offered  before  it) only  if one gets up (at night  to resume  his prayers)  and 
that it is not so if he does not get up is questionable,  unless  it is authentically  
handed  down  from  The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" that he had offered  Witr prayer  with an odd number  of rak'ahs  before  those  
two rak'ahs,  and that he had offered  Witr  once  again  after  them.  Thus,  it might  be 
understood  that although  those two rak'ahs  are even in form, they are odd in 
concept,  and this leads to the fact that they are considered  as odd if one does not 
get up or an even  if he gets up.
After  uttering  the End Salutation  of Witr prayer,  it is desirable  for one to say: 
Exalted  be (Allah)  the Sovereign,  the Holy One, the Lord of he angels  and the 
(Holy) Spirit: You've  honoured  both the heavens  and the earth with Your  
Greatness  and Compelling  Power,  and You've  been Exalted  in Strength  and 
Might  with Your Power  over all things,  and You've  oppressed  the servants  by 
causing  them to die." It is narrated  that The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon  him" did not die before  he offered  most  of his prayers  while  
sitting,  except  the obligatory  prescribed  prayers.  He said in this issue: "He who  
prays  while  sitting  receives  half the reward  of him who prays  while  standing,  and 
he who prays  while  lying  receives  half the reward  of him who prays  while  sitting."  
Of a surety,  this attests  the validity  of the supererogatory  prayer  in whichever  
state one might  offer.
The third  regular  division  pertains  to sleep;  and there  is no harm  to regard  
that as one of the regular  divisions,  for if its proprieties  are well-guarded,  it would  
be considered  as an act of worship.  It is said that if a servant  sleeps  while  being  in 
a state of purification  and ablution,  and celebrating  (the Praises  and Glories  of) 
Allah  Almighty,  he will be enlisted  among  the praying  ones until he gets up. An 
angel  enters  into his covering:  if he moves  during  his sleep,  and remembers  Allah  
Almighty,  such angel will then invoke  Allah for him, and pray for Allah's  
Forgiveness  for him. According  to a certain  narration:  "If a servant  sleeps  while  
being in a state of ablution,  his spirit will be raised up to the Throne  (of 
Majesty)."  If this is true about  the audience,  what  then about  the elite, the learned  
men, and the masters  of pure hearts?  The mysteries  are revealed  to them  during  
their sleep.
For this reason,  The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" said: "No doubt,  the sleep of a learned  man is an act of worship,  and his 
breaths  are Tasbihs."  Mu'adh  (Ibn  Jabal)  asked  Abu Musa:  "What  is your way of 
standing  at night (for supererogatory  prayers)?"  he said: "I keep wakeful  during  
the whole  night,  and never sleep for any part of it, in which  I recite the Holy  
Qur'an  perfectly  with competence  (as much  as I can)."  On that Mu'adh  said: "But655


Page 658:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
as for me, I sleep (for a portion  of the night)  and then I get up, and expect  for my 
sleep (from  Allah Almighty  the same reward)  which  I expect  for my standing."  
When  a mention  of that was made to The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  
and peace  be upon him",  he said: "Mu'adh  has better  understanding  of religion  
than  you (O Abu  Musa)."
There  are ten proprieties  pertaining  to sleep and they go as follows:
The first pertains  to purification,  ablution  and toothpick.  In this respect,  The  
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "If a servant  
sleeps  while  being  in a state of ablution,  his spirit  will be made to ascend  to the 
Throne  (of Majesty),  and his vision  (in dreams)  will prove  true; and if he does not 
sleep while being  in a state of ablution,  his spirit will cease to attain (the same  
position  of the former),  and thus what he sees during  his sleep will be no more  
than a confused  medley  of dreams  which  never  prove true." What  is intended  
here is the purification  of both the outward  and inward  altogether,  even though  
the purification  of the inward  has a greater  influence  upon removing  the screens  
of the unseen  dominion.
The second  is that one should  prepare  his toothpick  and water  for ablution,  
and place  them  by the side of his head,  having  the intention  to stand to perform  
supererogatory  prayer  once eh gets up from  sleep,  and whenever  he wakes  up, he 
should  brush  his teeth  with the toothpick,  according  to the practice  of some  early  
men. It is narrated  from The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon him" used to brush  his teeth with the toothpick  many times every  night:  
whenever  he went  to bed and whenever  he woke  up from sleep.  Furthermore,  if 
performing  ablution  is not available  to him, it is desirable  for him to pass his wet 
hand over the parts of his body,  and if this is not available,  let him sit down  and 
face the Qiblah,  and engage  himself  in the celebration  (of the Praises  and Glories  
of Allah Almighty),  supplication  and invocation,  meditation  on Allah's  Signs,  
Blessings,  Favours  and Power  over all things,  since that service  acts on behalf  of 
the standing  at night (for supererogatory  prayers).  It is narrated  that The  
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "He, who  
goes to bed, having  the intention  to stand at night to perform  supererogatory  
prayers,  and then he is overpowered  by slumber  until morning  comes  upon  him,  
(the reward  of standing  at night  for supererogatory  prayers  according  to) what  he 
has intended  would  be written  for him, and his sleep turns to be an object  of 
charity  for him from  Allah  Almighty."
The third is that he who has anything  in connection  with which  a bequest  
might  be made  should  not sleep unless  his bequest  is written  and placed  by the 
side of his head,  because  he is not safe from  death  during  his sleep.  However,  he 
who dies without  writing  his bequest  will be given  no permission  to speak  during  
the afterlife  (of the grave) till the Day of Judgement:  when the (spirits  of the) 
dead people  visit him and exchange  talks, he will not speak,  thereupon  they will 
say to each other: "This poor man died without  writing  a bequest."  Writing  a 
bequest  is desirable  for fear of the sudden  death;  and of a surety,  the sudden  
death is a kind of relief (for the people)  except  for him who is not ready for656


Page 659:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions  --------
death,  for the heavy  load of injustices  he has over  his back.
The fourth  is that one should  sleep after having  repented  from every  kind of 
sin, with his heart  sincere  to all of the Muslims,  having  no idea to wrong  anyone,  
nor intention  to do evil once he gets up (from  sleep).  In this respect,  it is narrated  
that The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "He,  
who goes to bed, having  no intention  to wrong  anyone,  nor feeling  of resentment  
against  anyone,  such of crimes  as he does will be forgiven  for him."
The fifth is that one should  not bless himself  with spreading  the soft thrones:  
on the contrary,  let him leave  it, or at least stick to moderation.  One of the early  
men was in the habit of having  aversion  towards  spreading  (such soft thrones)  
for sleep, seeing  that a kind of ostentation.  Those  of Suffah  (among  the poor  
people)  used to place nothing  between  their bodies  and the earth, saying:  "It is 
from it that we've  been created,  and to it shall we be returned."  They saw that 
more  convenient  to make  smooth  their hearts,  and humble  their souls.  But if one 
could  not endure  that, let him, at least,  stick to moderation  and self-restraint.
The sixth is that one should  not go to bed unless  he is overpowered  by 
slumber.  This means  that he should  not endeavour  to bring  about  sleep  unless  
his intention  therewith  is to seek its aid to stand at the last portion  of the 
night (for supererogatory  prayers).  However,  (the companions  and early men)  
used to go to bed only when  overpowered  by slumber,  eat only when  stricken  
by hunger,  speak only when forced  by necessity.  For this reason,  they were  
described  as being  "in the habit  of sleeping  but litde by night."  (Adh-Dhariyat657
17)
Moreover,  if he is overpowered  by slumber  from prayer  and celebration  (of 
Allah's  Praises),  and comes  to know  not what  he is saying,  let him sleep until he 
(recovers  and comes  to) know  well what  he is saying.
On the other  hand,  Ibn Abbas  "Allah  be pleased  with both"  disliked  to sleep  
while sitting. According  to a certain narration:  "Do not put yourselves  to 
suffering  during  the night."  According  to another  narration,  it was said to The 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him":  "Such  and Such a 
keeps praying  during  the night to the extent that whenever  she is woman
overpowered  by slumber,  she would  hang in a rope (to support  her standing)."  
He forbade  that and said: "Let anyone  of you pray during  the night  as much  as is 
easy for him, and if he is overpowered  by slumber,  let him sleep."  The Messenger  
of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" further  said: "Endeavour  to do 
deeds  as much  as is within  your capacity,  for indeed,  Allah  Almighty  never  gets 
tired (of giving  rewards)  until you become  exhausted  (of doing deeds)."  The  
Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" also said: "The  best  
(deed  in) this religion  is the easiest  in it (as long as it is done  with sincerity,  and 
does not contradict  the law)."
It was said to him: "So and so prays (during  the night) uninterruptedly  and 
sleeps,  and he observes  fasts continuously  (during  the day) and never  leaves never


Page 660:
658 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
fasting."  On that The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" said: "But as for me, I pray (for a portion  of the night) and sleep (for 
another  portion),  and I observe  fasts (for many  days) and I leave fasting  (during  
other  days):  This is my tradition,  and whoever  refrains  from  it does not belong  to 
me." The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said too: 
"Do not stick to the hard terms  of religion,  for it is unbreakable  and none  sticks  
to the hard terms  of this religion  but that he is overpowered."  So, make  not the 
worship  of Allah  hateful  to you.
The seventh  is that one should  sleep  while  facing  the direction  of the Qiblah.  
However,  facing  the direction  of the Qiblah  is of two kinds:  one is that of him 
who is at the threshold  of death,  i.e. to lie on his nape, with his face and toe 
towards  the direction  of the Qiblah.  The other is to face the direction  of the 
Qiblah  in the same way as one in the grave does, i.e. to lie on his right side,  
turning  his face towards  it, along  with the front  part of his body.
The eighth  pertains  to supplication  on his going  to bed: let him say: "In the 
Name  of You O my Lord I've laid my side, and in Your  Name  I rise it..." to 
the end of the handed  down  supplications  which  we've  introduced  in the Book  
of Supplications.  It is desirable  to recite such special  Holy Verses  as the Holy  
Verse  of the Throne,  the concluding  Verses  of Al-Baqarah,  and the like of that,  
in addition  to Allah's  statement:  " And your God is One God: there is no god 
but He, Most  Gracious,  Most  Merciful.  Behold!  In the creation  of the heavens  
and the earth;  in the alternation  of the Night  and the Day; in the sailing  of the 
ships through  the Ocean  for the profit  of mankind;  in the rain which  Allah  
sends down  from the skies, and the life which  He gives therewith  to an earth  
that is dead;  in the beasts  of all kinds  that He scatters  through  the earth;  in the 
change  of the winds  and the clouds  which  they trail like their  slaves  between  the 
sky and the earth, (here) indeed  are Signs for a people  that are wise." (Al- 
Baqarah  163:164)
2*
cljji Dj j-Ui lxj lL tsj£- (jjTi
It is said that if one recites  those Holy Verses,  Allah Almighty  helps him 
remain  in the habit  of keeping  the Holy Qur'an,  and he never  forgets  it. let him 
further  recite  the following  from the Surah  of Al-A'raf:  " Your  Guardian-Lord  is 
Allah,  Who created  the heavens  and the earth in six Days,  then He established  
Himself  on the Throne  (of authority):  He draws  the night  as a veil o'er the day, 
each seeking  the other  in rapid  succession:  He created  the sun, the moon,  and the 
stars, (all) governed  by laws under  His Command.  Is it not His to create  and to 
govern?  Blessed  be Allah, the Cherisher  and Sustainer  of the Worlds!  Call on 
your Lord with humility  and in private:  for Allah  loves not those  who trespass


Page 661:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions
beyond  bounds.  Do no mischief  on the earth,  after it has been set in order,  but 
call on Him with fear and longing  (in your hearts):  for the Mercy  of Allah is 
(always)  near to those  who do good."  (Al-A'raf  54:56)
3t,Jl jjl iiT ^^5^3 / jj ^
iyA»0 b^i  4-0 2W iljlS £ Vfj jlit  Jj VI >^Tj>aiTj  j-lljij
oj &lLj  liy- iyolj uLgbyvT _I Vj 0 V *i>J
40 rf sU:y
Let him recite  also the concluding  two Verses  of the Surah  of Al-Isra':  " Say: 
"Call upon  Allah,  or call upon  Rahman:  by whatever  name  you call upon  Him, (it 
is well):  for to Him belong  the Most  Beautiful  Names.  Neither  speak  your prayer  
aloud,  nor speak  it in a low tone,  but seek a middle  course  between."  Say: "Praise  
be to Allah,  Who begets  no son, and has no partner  in (His) dominion:  nor 
(needs)  He any to protect  Him from humiliadon:  yea, glorify  Him for His 
greatness  and glory!""  (Al-Isra'  110:111)
^Tj tr.oili  £ \f\ ^)\  iyoli £Z\ Ji >
Cr? £13 ^ 4*^^  4 '-Sj -4^  4J l?A)i ^ -Ui-T  Jij :Q) ow
If he does so, an angel  enters  into his covering,  and is entrusted  to safeguard  
him, and pray for Allah's  Forgiveness  for him. Let him recite both Surahs  of 
seeking  refuge  (with  Allah  from  Satan),  and blow  with them  in his hands  and pass  
them  over his face and the different  parts of his body,  according  to the practice  
of The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him". Let him 
recite the starting  ten and the concluding  ten Verses  of Al-Kahf.  Those  Holy  
Verses  are particular  to wakefulness  for the standing  at night  (for supererogatory  
prayers).  Ali Ibn Abu Talib used to say: "I do not see that there is a wise man  
who could  sleep before  he recites  the two concluding  Verses  of the Surah  of Al- 
Baqarah,  and says twenty-five  times:  Exalted  be Allah;  Praise  be to Allah;  there  is 
no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah;  and Allah  is Greater"  making  a total of one 
hundred.
The ninth is that one should  remember  on his going  to bed that sleep is a 
minor death as well as wakefulness  is a kind of raising  (from dead). Allah  
Almighty  says in this issue: "It is Allah  that takes  the souls (of men) at death;  and 
those that die not (He takes)  during  their sleep: those on whom  He has passed  
the decree  of death,  He keeps  back (from  returning  to life), but the rest He sends  
(to their bodies)  for a term appointed.  Verily  in this are Signs for those who  
reflect."  (Az-Zumar  42)
40  ^Sz  ^659


Page 662:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
He further  says: "It is He Who  does take your  souls  by night."  (Al-An'am  60)
He gives sleep the name  of death.  As well as several  kinds of contemplation  
might  be revealed  to the wakeful  which  are not relevant  to his state during  sleep,  
the one resurrected  (from  dead) will see what has never  occurred  to his mind,  
which  he has never  perceived  with his senses  (in the world).
The parable  of sleep between  life and death  is like the parable  of the afterlife  
(in the grave)  in the interval  between  the world  and the hereafter.  Luqman  said to 
his son: "O my son! If you have doubt  in death,  do not sleep,  for as well as you 
sleep,  you will die; and if you have doubt  in the resurrection  (after  death),  then,  
do not get up (from  your sleep),  for as well as you get up from your sleep,  you 
will be resurrected  from your death."  According  to Ka'b A-Ahbar:  "When  you 
go to bed, lie on your right side and face the direction  of the Qiblah,  for indeed  
sleep is a minor  death."  It is narrated  on the authority  of A'ishah  "Allah be 
pleased  with her" that she said: The last words  which  The Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" used to say before  he would  go to bed,  
and he was lying his face on his right hand,  expecting  death  on 
are: "O Allah,  Lord of the seven heavens,  Lord of the earth, and Lord of the 
Throne  (of Majesty)  Most Great, our Lord and the Lord and Master  of all 
things..."  to the need of the supplication  as we've  introduced  in the Book of 
Supplications.
Therefore,  it is incumbent  upon a servant  to verify  of three things on his 
going  to bed: on what he is going  to sleep, and whether  it is the love of Allah  
Almighty,  and the love of meeting  Him or the love of this world (with its 
vanities)  that prevail  over his heart,  with assurance  that he dies on the same  state  
which  prevails  over him, and that he will be resurrected  on the same state on 
which  he dies, for indeed,  one will be mustered  with whomever  he loves,  and on 
the same  as he loves.
The tenth pertains  to his supplication  whenever  he wakes  up from sleep: let 
him say, whenever  he gets up, moves  or becomes  wakeful,  the same as The  
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" used to say: "There  
is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah,  the One and Only, the Irresistible,  the 
Lord of both the heavens  and the earth, and all that lies between  them, the 
Exalted  in Might,  the Oft-Forgiving."  Moreover,  let him endeavour,  as much  as 
he could,  to have the celebration  of Allah  Almighty  the last thing  in his mind on 
his going  to bed, and the first thing  to occur  to his mind on his getting  up from  
sleep,  for it is the sign of love, and in both states,  the heart  never  adheres  but to 
that which  prevails  over it. so, let his heart experience  that, which  is (as we've  
mentioned)  the sign of love. Such sign disclose  the inward  of the heart.
However,  this celebrations  (of Allah  Almighty)  are desirable  for they draw the 
heart to remember  Allah Almighty.  If one, for example,  wakes  up to stand (for 
night  supererogatory  prayers)  let him say: "Praise  be to Allah  Who  has brought  us 
to life once again after He had caused  us to die (the minor  death  of sleep),  to660
this night  of his


Page 663:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions  
Whom  does belong  the matter  of resurrection..."  to the end of the different  
supplications  of wakefulness  which  we've  introduced  earlier.
The fourth  regular  division  begins  just by the time the first half  of the night  
has elapsed  and lasts until there remains  only one-sixth  the night.  At that time,  
the servant  gets up to perform  the night religious  vigil (Tahajjud  prayer)  whose  
name refers to the time of night prayer  which  one offers  after getting  up from  
sleep, and it lies at the middle  of the night;  and in this way, it is similar  to the 
regular  division  which  lies after the sun decline,  i.e. at the middle  of the day. It is 
by that regular  division  that Allah Almighty  swears  in His saying:  "And by the 
Night  when  it is still." (Ad-Duha  2)661
4 © ^
Its stillness  refers  to its quietness  at that time, as there is no eye but that it is 
sleeping  except  for that of the Ever-Living,  Self-Subsisting,  Eternal,  Eternal,  
Whom  no slumber  nor sleep could overtake.  The stillness  also refers to the 
night's  prolonged  expansion  and deep darkness.
The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" was asked:  
"At which portion  of the night (the celebrations  and supplications)  are more  
audible?"  he said: "The middle  of the night."  It is narrated  that (the Prophet)  
David  said: "O my God! I like to worship  You: which  time is the best (and most  
fitting)?"  Allah  Almighty  revealed  to him: "O David!  Stand  not at the first portion  
nor at the last portion  of the night. He who stands  at its first portion  always  
sleeps  at its last portion,  and he who stands  at its last portion  does not stand  at its 
first portion.  But you might  stand at its middle,  in order  that you become  with  
Me Alone,  and I become  with you alone,  and thus you will be able to raise your  
needs  to Me."
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" was asked:  
"Which  portion  of the night  is the best (and most fitting  for religious  service)?"  
he said: "Its remaining  half', i.e. the other half of the night. There are many  
narrations  in support  of the excellence  of the last portion  of the night,  at which  
the Throne  (of Majesty  and Authority)  shakes,  the winds spread from the 
Gardens  of Eden,  and (Allah)  the Compeller  Almighty  descends  with His Glory  
to the heaven  that is the nearest  to the earth,  etc.
The items of that regular  division  are arranged  as follows:  after one finishes  
from the supplications  of wakefulness,  let him perform  ablution  observing  its 
traditions,  proprieties  and related  supplications,  and go to his praying  place and 
stand  facing  the direction  of the Qiblah.  Then,  let him say: "Allah  is Greater  (with  
Whose  Glories)  I glorify  Him,  and Praise  be to Allah  as much  as it could  be, and 
Glory  be to Allah every morning  and evening."  Then,  let him exalt Allah ten 
times,  praise Him ten times, affirm  His Oneness  ten times,  and say: "Allah  is 
Greater,  Lord  of Dominion,  Compelling  Might,  Magnificence,  Greatness,  Majesty  
and Power  (over  all things)."  Let him say the following  words  for they are handed  
down  from  The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" in 
his standing  for the night  vigil:


Page 664:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
"O Allah! to You be the praise:  You are the Light of the heavens  and the 
earth,  to You be the Praise:  You are the Brightness  of the heavens  and the earth.  
To You be the Praise:  You are the Lord of the heavens  and the earth.  To You be 
Praise:  You are the Sustainer  of the heavens  and the earth,  what  is and what  on 
them.  You are the Truth,  and from  You truth (is expected).  Meeting  You is a fact;  
the Garden  is a fact; the fire (of Hell) is a fact; the resurrection  (on the Day of 
Judgement)  is a fact; the Prophets  (whom  You sent) are a fact; Muhammad  
"Peace  be upon  him" (as the Seal and Last of Prophets  and Messengers  to all of 
men and jinns) is a fact. O Allah!  to You I bow (in Islam),  and in You I have  
faith,  and on You I put my trust,  to You I turn (in repentance),  with You I argue  
(my enemies),  and to You I appeal  to judge (between  me and my adversaries):  
forgive  for me what I've done earlier  and later, what I've committed  in secrecy  
and in public,  and that in which I've indulged:  You are the One Who bring  
forward,  and You are the One Who  bring  backward  (such  of His servants  ad You  
please).  There  is no god (to be worshipped)  but You: O Allah!  endow  my soul  
with its piety,  and justify  and purify  it, for You are the best to justify  and purify  
(men's  souls),  and You are its Guardian  and Protector.  O Allah!  guide  me to do 
the best of deeds,  to which  none  barring  You could  guide,  and avert  from me the 
worst  of them,  which  none Barring  You could  avert.  I beg You in the same  way 
as a poor  wretched  begs,  and I invoke  You in the same  way as a needy  mortified  
invokes.  Make not me unblest  in my prayer to You, and be to me Most  
Compassionate,  Most  Merciful:  O (Allah)  the best of those  who are begged,  and 
the most  generous  of those  who give."
It is narrated  on the authority  of A'ishah  "Allah  be pleased  with her" that she 
said: Whenever  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon  
him" stood  at night (for night  vigils)  he would  commence  his prayers  saying:  "O 
Allah!  Lord  of Gabriel,  Michael  and Israfll,  Creator  of the heavens  and the earth,  
Knower  of the unseen  and that which  is visible:  You always  judge  between  Your  
servants  in that in which  they fall in dispute:  guide me to such of truth as in 
which  there are disputes,  by Your Leave:  You guide such of Your servants  as 
You please  to a way that is straight."  Then,  he would  inaugurate  the prayers  with  
two light rak'ahs,  and then continue  his prayers  in pairs of rak'ahs  as much  as it 
would  be available  to him after  which  he would  conclude  with the Witr prayer  in 
case he had not prayed  it yet.
It is desirable  that one should  make  a break  of Tasbihs  one hundred  times  on 
his salutation  between  each two prayers  (of a pair of rak'ahs),  perchance  he would  
take rest and become  more active to continue  his prayers.  According  to an 
authentic  narration  pertaining  to the night prayer  of The Messenger  of Allah  
"Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him", he offered  at first two light rak'ahs,  
followed  by two long  rak'ahs,  followed  by two rak'ahs,  shorter  than those  prior  to 
them,  and he kept in the habit of gradual  shortening  along  thirteen  rak'ahs.  On 
the other hand, A'ishah  "Allah be pleased  with her" was asked: "Did The  
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" use to recite  aloud  
or in a low tone in his night  prayer?"  she said: "Sometimes  he recited  aloud,  and662


Page 665:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions  
sometimes  he recited  in a low tone."
The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "The  
night prayer  should  be offered  in pairs of rak'ahs,  and if you fear the (time of) 
Morning  (prayer)  would overtake  you, conclude  your prayers  with a single  
rak'ah."  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him"  
further  said: "Since  the Maghrib  prayer  makes  the day prayers  an odd (number  of 
rak'ahs),  so, you should  make the night  prayers  an odd (number  of rak'ahs)."  The 
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" used to offer  
thirteen  rak'ahs  for night prayer  according  to the most authentic  narrations,  in 
which  he used to recite  from his daily  portion  of the Qur'an,  or from  such certain  
Surahs  as was light and easy upon him; and he was, according  to that regular  
division,  close  to the last sixth of the night.
The fifth regular  division  lies at the last sixth of the night;  and it is the time  
of the early  dawn (i.e. a short  time before  dawn),  to which  Allah  Almighty  refers  
in His statement:  " And in the hours  of early  dawn,  they (were  found)  praying  for 
Forgiveness."  (Adh-Dhariyat  18)663
4 ^
It is said that it means  they offer  prayer,  for indeed  prayer  implies  asking  Allah  
for forgiveness.  This time is very close to dawn,  i.e. the time at which  the night  
angels  turn away, and the day angels  come (in succession).  One night, Salman  
(Al-Farisi)  visited  his brother  Abu Ad-Darda',  and advised  him to observe  this 
regular  division,  according  to a long narration,  in the last portion  of which  he 
said: When  it was the night,  Abu Ad-Darda'  went  to stand  (for the night  prayers),  
thereupon  Salman  said to him: "Sleep!"  He slept,  and a short  time later, he went  
to stand  (for the night  prayer),  thereupon  he said to him once again:  "Sleep!"  He 
slept,  and when  it was a short  time before  dawn,  Salman  said to him: "Now  you 
might  stand (for night prayer)."  Both stood  and prayed  together.  Then,  Salman  
said to him: "Of  a surety,  your soul has a right on you, your guest  has a right on 
you, and your family  has a right  on you: so, you should  give each his right that is 
due to him."  However,  the wife of Abu Ad-Darda'  told Salman  that her husband  
slept  at night.  They  then went to The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing never
and peace  be upon  him" and made  a mention  of that to him, thereupon  he said:  
"Salman  has told the truth."
This is the fifth devotional  prayer,  in which  having  the night  meal (Suhur)  is 
desirable,  for fear of the rising  of dawn.  Prayer  constitutes  the main duty in both  
(the fourth  and the fifth) regular  divisions.  Once dawn rises, the night regular  
divisions  have finished,  and those  of the day have begun.  So, let one stand and 
offer a two-rak'ah  prayer prior to Fajr. This is what is intended  by Allah's  
statement:  " And for part of the night  also praise  you Him, and at the retreat  of 
the stars!"  (At-Tur  49)
4 >->j3 cW' )
Then,  let him recite  Allah's  saying:  "There  is no god but He: that is the witness


Page 666:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
of Allah,  His angels,  and those  endued  with knowledge,  standing  firm on justice.  
There  is no god but He the Exalted  in Power,  the Wise."  (A1 Imran  18)
4 > Njiij  y Jj\ijjjij  ijj V ST iji, ^
Once  he finishes  it he should  say: "And I too bear the same witness  as Allah  
Almighty  bears  to Himself,  and the same  witness  of the angels  and those  endued  
with knowledge  among  His creatures,  and I trust such witness  with Allah  
Almighty,  as a deposit  for me in the Presence  of Allah  Almighty,  and I ask Him  
to guard  it for me until He takes  my soul (unto  him) while  adhering  to it. O Allah!  
plot out of me a sin for it, and make  it a treasure  (of good  deeds)  with You,  guard  
it with  Yourself,  and cause  me to die while  sticking  to it until I meet  You,  without  
changing  (my faith)."
This is the order of regular  divisions  (along  the day and night) which  the 
different  servants  should  follow.  Besides,  they liked to combine  four important  
things  everyday:  to observe  fast, to give in charity  no matter  litde it might  be, 
(and if it is available)  to visit a patient  (to enquire  about  his health),  and to follow  
a funeral  procession.  According  to a certain  narration:  "He who combines  those  
four things  on a day will have his sins forgiven  for him, or (according  to another  
version)  will enter  the Garden."  But if one does some  of them,  and fails to do the 
others,  he will have the reward  of all of them,  according  to his intention  (to do 
them).
Furthermore,  they disliked  to have a day pass without  giving  an object  of 
charity,  even as little and trivial  as a date, an onion,  or a fragment  of bread,  in 
view of the statement  of The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon  him":  "One  will remain  underneath  the shade  of his (object  of) charity  until  
it will be decided  among  the people  (on the Day of Judgement)."  The Messenger  
of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" further  said: "Safeguard  
yourselves  from the fire (of Hell) even with half a date (to give in charity)."  It is 
narrated  that A'ishah  "Allah  be pleased  with her" gave a single  fruit of grapes  to a 
beggar,  and he took  it, and when  those  who were present  in her house  looked  at 
each other  (out of astonishment)  she said to them:  "What  is the matter  with you?  
Indeed,  it has many  weights  of atoms  (of good)."
That's  because  they disliked  to return  a beggar  with failure,  in imitation  of the 
good manners  of The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" who used to do so, to the extent  that no beggar  asked  him about  anything  
and he answered  him in the negative,  but if he failed to do it, he would  keep  
silent.  According  to a certain  narration:  "The Morning  comes  upon the son of 
Adam  and there is an object  of charity  due upon every joint of his body, and 
there  are three  hundred  and sixty  joints  in his body:  to enjoin  good  is an object  of 
charity,  to forbid  evil is an object  of charity,  to carry  (heavy  things)  on behalf  of a 
weak one is an object  of charity,  to guide one to the right way is an object  of 
charity,  to remove  the harmful  things  (from  the road) is an object  of charity. ..664


Page 667:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions
and so on until he mentioned  Tasbih,  Tahlil (affirmation  of Allah's  Oneness),  
after which  he said: "And the two-rak'ah  prayer  of Forenoon  joins or combines  
all of that to you."
The Exposition  Of The Difference  Of regular  divisions  According  To
The Difference  Of States
It should  be known  to you that the seeker  after the tilth of the hereafter,  who  
follows  the way that leads to it, is not independent  of sixth states:  he might  be 
either  a worshipper,  or a learned,  or a learner,  or a guardian,  or a craftsman,  or a 
monotheist  who is fully occupied  by the One and Only, the Eternal,  the 
Absolute,  from  anything  else.
The first pertains  to the worshipper,  who is wholeheartedly  devoted  to the 
service  of Allah,  and he has no other job, and were he to leave the religious  
service,  he would  become  idle. The same order  of regular  divisions  (during  both  
day and night)  which  we've  mentioned  then applies  to him. It is not improbable  
that the duties  (included  under  those  regular  divisions)  might  be different,  in the 
sense that he might,  for instance,  spend  most of his time either  in prayer,  or in 
recitation  (of the Holy Qur'an),  or in Tasbih  (and Dhikr).  From amongst  the 
companions  "Allah  be pleased  with them" there was one whose  daily portion  
consisted  of twelve  thousand  Tasbihs,  one whose  rose up to thirty  thousand,  one 
whose  daily portion  consisted  of three hundred  to six hundred  rak'ahs,  and one 
whose  daily  portion  rose up to one thousand  rak'ahs.
There are many reports  to tell that the least amount  of prayer which  
constituted  the daily portion  of anyone  of them was one hundred  rak'ahs  per 
night  and day. The Holy Qur'an  constituted  the greatest  part of the daily portion  
of some of them,  and one of them might  recite the Qur'an  in full once or even  
twice a day according  to certain  narrations.  Some of them spent one or two 
nights  involved  in a state of meditation  on a single  Holy  Verse  which  he repeated  
so many times. Kurz Ibn Wabarah  lived in Mecca,  and he used to perform  
seventy  circumambulations  round  the House  every  day and further  seventy  every  
night,  each consisting  of seven  rounds.  Besides,  he used to recite the Qur'an  in 
full twice  every  night  and day. When  the distance  (which  he covered  during  all of 
his circumambulations  everyday)  was accounted,  it was as much  as ten Farsakhs.  
He also offered
circumambulation,  making  a total of two hundred  and eighty  rak'ahs  (in one 
hundred  and forty circumambulations),  two recitals  of the Qur'an  in full, and (a 
distance of) ten Farsakhs (in nine hundred and eighty rounds of 
circumambulation) .
But, you might  raise the following  question:  "Which  one (of those  duties)  is 
the most  fitting  for spending  the greatest  part of time of those  regular  divisions?"  
it should  be known  that the recitation  of the Holy Qur'an  while standing  in 
prayer  with meditation  and consideration  combines  all of that, but perhaps,  it 
might  be difficult  to be regular  on doing  it. so, the best then differs  with the665
two-rak'ah  prayer following  each seven-round


Page 668:
666 The quarter  of the acts of worship
different  states of a certain  person.  However,  since the main purpose  of the 
regular  division  is to justify,  purify  and adorn  the heart  and make  it affable  with  
the celebration  of the Praises  and Glories  of Allah  Almighty,  let the follower  of 
the path consider  his heart,  and keep regular  on doing  such of duties  as seems  to 
him to have the greater  influence  upon  it; and once he feels tedious  of it, let him 
then move  to another  duty. For this reason,  we think  that it is most  convenient  to 
the majority  of the people  to distribute  those different  good acts upon the 
various  times  in the same  way as we've  explained  earlier,  and to move  from one 
to another  once  he feels tired,  for boredom  always  prevails  over the dispositions.
On the other  hand,  one person  might  have different  states (which  vary from  
time to time) therein.  But let him who understands  the significance  and mystery  
lying behind  the regular  divisions,  follow  the meaning:  if he hears a Tasbih,  for 
example,  and he feels it has influence  upon  his heart,  let him repeat  it regularly,  as 
long  as he entertains  its influence  upon  his heart.
In this respect,  it is narrated  on the authority  of Ibrahim  Ibn Adham  from  one 
of the Substitutes  (Abdal)  that one night, he stood to offer prayer on the 
seashore,  and heard  a high voice  exclaiming  with Tasbihs,  but he saw none. He 
said: I asked:  "Who  are you whose  voice I hear, even though  I see your body  
not?"  he said: "I'm one of the angels,  to whom  the affair  of this sea is entrusted:  I 
exalt  Allah  Almighty  with this Tasbih  since I was created."  I asked  him: "What  is 
your name?"  he said: "Mihlihya'il."  I asked:  "What  is the reward  of him who says 
that?"  he said: "He who says it one hundred  times  will not die until he sees his 
sitting  place in the Garden,  or until it is seen for him." This Tasbih  goes as 
follows:  "Exalted  be Allah,  Most  High,  Ever-Living!  Glorified  be Allah,  Lord of 
power  supports!  Glorified  be (Allah)  Who does away with the night  and brings  
the daylight  (to succeed  it)! glorified  be (Allah)  Whom  no affair could occupy  
from  the other!  Glorified  be Allah,  Oft-Compassionate,  Oft-Granting  (of favours  
without  measure)!  Glorified  be Allah Who is glorified  everywhere  (in the 
worlds)."  Whenever  the follower  of the path hears  this and the like of it, and feels  
its influence  upon  his heart,  let him stick to it; and let him further  be regular  on 
the thing  he finds  his heart  attached  to it, in which  there  is much  good  for him.
The second  pertains  to the learned  man,  who is a source  of benefit  to others  
with his knowledge,  through  giving  a religious  verdict,  teaching  or composing  (a 
work  in any field of interest).  As for him, the sequence  of regular  divisions  differs  
from that of a worshipper.  That's because  he is in need of going through  
different  books, composing  works to benefit  others, in which he should  
inevitably  assign  a certain  portion  of time. If it is possible  for him to spend  his 
time in this task,  it is the best to engage  himself  in after  the obligatory  written  and 
traditional  prayers.  This is clearly  attested  from all that we've  mentioned  in our 
discussion  of the excellence  of teaching  and learning,  in the Book  of Knowledge.
How could  it not be so, since knowledge  is a regular  remembrance  of Allah  
Almighty,  and meditation  on what Allah Almighty  and His Messenger  said?


Page 669:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions  
Furthermore,  in it there is the benefit  of the creature,  and their guidance  to the 
way of the hereafter.  A learner  might  obtain  only a single  question,  therewith  he 
mends  his service  during  the whole  of his lifetime,  and had he not learnt  it, his 
endeavour  would  have failed  (to attain  its objectives).
We mean by knowledge  which  has priority  to religious  service  is that kind of 
knowledge  which  makes  the hereafter  desirable  and pleasing  to the people,  and 
causes  them to refrain  and abstain  from this world,  or that kind of knowledge  
which  helps  them  follow  the path which  leads to the hereafter,  in case they obtain  
it for the purpose  of seeking  its aid to follow  such path, and not those kinds of 
knowledge,  therewith  the desire for property,  power of authority  and 
acceptability  to the people  becomes  stronger.
It is more fitting  for a learned  man to distribute  his times,  for indeed  to spend  
all the time in seeking  after knowledge  is unbearable.  Thus,  let him assign  the 
period  which  begins  just after (finishing  from)  Morning  (prayer  until the rising  of 
the sun to celebrations  (of Allah's  Glories  and Praises)  and daily recitals  in the 
same  way as we've  introduced  in the first regular  division.  Let him then assign  the 
period  which  begins  just after the rising  (of the sun) until forenoon  to benefit  and 
teach knowledge,  in case he has one who obtains  knowledge  for the sake of the 
hereafter,  otherwise,  let him spend  it in meditation,  i.e. the meditation  of such of 
religious  sciences  as seems  to be problematic  and confusing  to him, for indeed,  
the purity  of the heart  after finishing  from remembrance  (of Allah  Almighty)  and 
before  engagement  in the affairs  of this world  helps one go over the difficulties  
and problems.
Let him assign the period  from forenoon  to Asr time to composing  and 
reading,  which  he should  not leave unless  it is time to eat, perform  ablution  or 
offer the obligatory  prayer,  and there is no blame to have a light siesta if the 
daylight  is long. In the period  from Asr time until the sun becomes  yellow,  let 
him engage  in hearing  what  is recited  to him, from interpretation  (of the Qur'an),  
Prophetic  traditions  and beneficial  knowledge.  From  the period  of sun yellowness  
until sunset,  let him engage  in Dhikr,  Tasbih  and Istighfar.  In this way, his first 
regular  division  before  the rising  of the sun is assigned  to the work  of the tongue,  
his second  regular  division  up to the time of forenoon  to the work  of the heart  
through  meditation,  his third regular  division  from forenoon  to Asr time to the 
work of the eye and the hand through  reading  and writing,  his fourth  regular  
division  after  Asr time up to sunset  to the work  of the hearing,  in order  to relieve  
both the eye and the hand, for reading  and writing  after Asr time might  cause  
harm  to the eye, and when  the sun becomes  yellow,  he returns  to the celebration  
by the tongue.  Thus,  no 
organs,  with the presence  of the heart.
As to the night,  the best way of distributing  it is that made  by Shafi ’i "Allah's  
Mercy  be upon him" who used to divide  it into three parts: the first third for 
reading  and arranging  the items of knowledge,  the middle  third for the prayer,667
5
i
portion  of the day will be free from the work of the


Page 670:
668 The quarter  of the acts of worship
and the last third for sleep.  This is available  in the nights  of both summer  and 
winter.  But it might  be unbearable  unless  the greatest  part of sleep  is taken  during  
the daylight.  This is most  desirable  in the sequence  of the regular  divisions  of the 
learned  man.
The third pertains  to the learner;  and of a surety,  to engage  in learning  is 
better  than to engage  in celebrations  and supererogatory  deeds.  Thus,  the same  
rule of arranging  the regular  divisions  applied  to the learned  applies  also to him,  
but as well as the learned  engages  himself  in introducing  benefit  to others,  he 
engages  in obtaining  (knowledge),  and as well as the learned  engages  in 
composing,  he engages  in commenting  and copying  (what  he learns).  After  that,  
let him arrange  his times in the same way as we've  mentioned  earlier.  All that 
we've  introduced  pertaining  to the excellence  of learning  and teaching  affirms  
that this is better;  and even if he is not a learner  in the sense that he does not 
make  comments  and copy  (what  he learns)  with the intention  to become  one of 
the learned,  and rather  he is one of the audience,  it is better  for him to attend  
the gathering  of remembrance  (of Allah),  teaching  and knowledge  than to 
engage  in such of regular  divisions  as we've mentioned  earlier  after Morning  
(prayer)  and after  the rising  (of the sun),  as well as in the other  dmes.
According  to a narration  on the authority  of Abu Dharr: "To attend a 
gathering  of remembrance  (of Allah)  is much  better  than to pray one thousand  
rak'ahs,  follow  one thousand  funeral  processions,  and visit one thousand  patients  
(to enquire  about  their health)."  According  to another  narration,  The Messenger  
of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "When  you see the 
meadows  of the Garden,  enjoy  yourselves  in them."  They  asked:  "O Messenger  
of Allah! what are the meadows  of the Garden?"  he said: "The ring-shaped  
gatherings  of remembrance  (of Allah)."  according  to Ka'b Al-Ahbar:  "Had the 
reward  of the gatherings  of remembrance  (of Allah  Almighty)  become  visible  to 
the people,  surely,  they would  have competed  each other  to have sitting  places  in 
them,  to the extent  that the leader  would  have  left his office  and the trader  would  
have  left his market."
According  to Umar  Ibn Al-Khattab  "Allah  be pleased  with him": "One sets 
out of his house,  having  as much  sins as the mountain  of Tihamah,  and if he pays  
his attention  to a learned  man,  he feels afraid  (of Allah)  and gives  up his sins, and 
thus returns  home  having  no sin. So, leave  not the gatherings  of the learned  men,  
for Allah Almighty  has never  created,  on the surface  of the earth,  a soil more  
generous  than that on which  the gatherings  of the learned  men are hold."  A man  
said to Al-Hassan  "Allah's  Mercy  be upon  him":  "I complain  to you the cruelty  of 
my heart." He said to him: "Then, bring it closer to the gatherings  of 
remembrance  (of Allah  Almighty)."
It is reported  that Ammar  Az-Zahidi  (Ascetic)  saw in his dream  Miskinah  
(Female  indigent)  At-Tafawiyyah  who was regular  on attending  the circles  of 
remembrance  (of Allah Almighty).  He said to her: "Welcome  to you O Female


Page 671:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions
Indigent! ” she said: "Ye! Let it be far off! Let it be far off! No doubt,  the state of 
neediness  has disappeared  to be replaced  with richness."  He asked  her: "How  is 
that? she said: "How  do you ask about  him to whom  the Garden  with all of its 
contents  has been made permissible?"  he asked: "By which thing have  
attained  that?" she said: "By virtue of sitting  in the company  of these who  
remember  (Allah  in their gatherings)."  In brief, such of knots of love for this 
world  (with  its vanities  and pleasures)  as are loosened  from the heart  by virtue  of 
the words of a preacher  of good speech and pleasant  conduct  
honourable  and beneficial  than so many  rak'ahs  one might  offer,  while his heart  
still have the stain of love for this world.
The fourth  pertains  to the craftsman  who needs  to get earnings  to spend  
his dependents.  It is not consonant  with his state to waste  his dependents,  and 
rather  spend  all of his time in the acts of worship.  Therefore,  his regular  division  
at the time of work is to attend  the market  and engage  in getting  his earnings.  
But, he should  not forget  the remembrance  of Allah Almighty  in his work.  Let 
him be regular  on Tasbih,  Adhkar,  recitation  of the Holy Qur'an,  which  might  be 
done during  the time of work, but prayer  is not available  unless he acts as 
supervisor,  and in this case, he does not fail to establish  his daily divisions  of 
prayers.  Once he finishes  from earning  such of sustenance  as suffices  him, he 
should  returns  to the normal  sequence  of the regular  divisions.  But even, to 
continue  to work  and earn more,  and give in charity  what  is beyond  his need,  this 
will be better  than to practice  the other  regular  divisions  which  we've  introduced,  
because  the benefit  of the acts of worship  that are transitive  is much  greater  than  
that of the intransitive  (for the benefits  and advantages  of the former  transcend  
the doer to others,  unlike the latter whose  reward  is exclusive  to the doer  
himself).  Both charity  and earnings,  according  to this intention,  are regarded  as 
acts of worship,  which draw him near unto Allah Almighty,  and by which a 
benefit  returns  to the others,  and he himself  gets benefit  from the blessing  of the 
invocations  of Muslims  (i.e. the beneficiaries),  and his reward  is multiplied.
The fifth pertains  to the guardian,  like the ruler, judge and anyone  whose  
office  makes  him in charge  of the affairs  of the Muslims.  However,  to undertake  
the affairs  and matters  of the Muslims,  with sincerity,  and according  to law, is 
much  better  than to practice  the regular  divisions  which  we've  introduced.  It is 
fitting  for him to engage  in the rights of the people  by day, and satisfy  himself  
with the performance  of the obligatory  written  deeds,  and establish  the regular  
divisions  referred  to earlier  at night, the same as Umar "Allah  be pleased  with  
him" did. He said in this respect:  "What  should  I have to do with sleep?  If I sleep  
during  the day, I will waste  the Muslims  (for I will then indulge  in the rights  they  
have upon  me), and if I sleep at night,  I will waste  myself  (for I will then indulge  
in the acts of worship)."
It is understood  from  what  has been  mentioned  that there  are two things  to be 
given  priority  to the physical  acts of worship:  one is knowledge,  and the other  is669
you
are more
on


Page 672:
670 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
to be kind and lenient  to the Muslims.  Each of those,  i.e. knowledge  and doing  
favours  is in itself  a work,  and at the same time an act of worship,  superior  to the 
other  acts of worship,  whose  benefit  and widespread  advantage  are transitive  to 
others;  and it is for this reason  that they are given  priority  to the other religious  
services.
The sixth pertains  to the monotheist  who is fully occupied  by the One and 
Only, the Eternal,  the Absolute,  from anything  else. It is that whose many  
interests  come  to be one: he loves none but Allah  Almighty,  feels afraid  of none  
but Allah  Almighty,  expects  sustenance  from none other  than Him, never  looks  
at anything  but that he sees Allah  Almighty  in it. the one whose  rank is high as 
such has no need to vary the regular  divisions:  on the contrary,  he has only one 
regular  division  following  every obligatory  written  prayer,  i.e. to have his heart  
fully present  with Allah  Almighty  in all of his states.  No idea occurs  to his mind,  
nothing  hits his hearing,  and nothing  seems  to his sight  but that in which  he has a 
lesson  (to learn) and example  (to follow),  meditation,  reflection,  and (cause  of 
their) more  (faith).  Nothing  motivates  them  nor makes  them calm and still other  
than Allah  Almighty.  Each  of his states  then is fitting  fore being  a cause  of their  
getting  more  (faith),  in the sense  that no act of worship  has priority  to another  in 
his sight.
Such one belongs  to those who has hastened  (with their faith) to Allah  
Almighty  as described  by Allah in His statement:  "that you may receive  
instruction.  Hasten  you then (at once)  to Allah."  (Adh-Dhariyat49-50)
It is in connection  with them that Allah's  saying  has been realized:  "When  you 
turn away from them and the things they worship  other than Allah, betake  
yourselves  to the Cave:  your  Lord  will shower  His mercies  on you and dispose  of 
your  affair  towards  comfort  and ease."  (Al-Kahf  16)
\s-M3  cr? jj bjli yi C»j Slj ^
i (c|5 I ^
It is also to this state that the following  statement  of Allah  refers:  " He said: "I 
will go to my Lord!  He will surely  guide  me!" (As-Saffat  99)
^ 23* (Jj JJ (ji ^
This is the highest  degree  of the truly faithful  believers,  which  could not be 
attained  except  after  doing  up the regular  divisions  with regularity  for a long time.  
A follower  of the path should  not be deceived  by the fact that what  he has learnt  
(in this book)  is sufficient  for him to claim  he is as such,  and weaken  to continue  
the other  duties  of his worship:  but the sign of being  really  so is that no suspicion  
nor evil suggestion  should  occur  to one's mind,  nor should  the most  destructive  
terrors  frighten  him, nor should  the greatest  occupations  provoke  him. How- >


Page 673:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions 671
should  this high rank be granted  to anyone?  
To conclude,  all (types  of) men should  observe  the constitution  of the regular  
divisions  in the very way we've  introduced,  and all that we've  mentioned  here are 
but ways to (the Presence  of) Allah Almighty.  Allah Almighty  says: " Say: 
"Everyone  acts according  to his own disposition:  but your Lord knows  best who  
it is that is best guided  on the Way.""  (Al-Isra'  84)
4dp cpk*  fSvA^
All of those (who follow  such constitution  of regular  divisions)  are guided,  
even  though  some  are better  guided  than others.  According  to a certain  narration:  
"Faith  has three hundred  and thirty-three  ways: whoever  meets  Allah  Almighty  
bearing  testimony  (to the Oneness  of Allah, and the Aposdeship  of His 
Messenger)  only with one of them  will enter  the Garden."  According  to a learned  
man: "Faith  is of three  hundred  and thirteen  ways,  in agreement  with the number  
of the Messengers  and Prophets,  and such of believers  as follows  one of those  
ways  does indeed  follow  the way to Allah  Almighty."
Whatever  different  the people's  ways of worship  might  be, all are on the right:  
" Those  whom  they call upon  do desire  (for themselves)  means  of access  to their  
Lord,  even those  who are nearest:  they hope for His Mercy  and fear His Wrath."  
(Al-Isra*  57)
0yr"ji3  VA'  -Lg-JJ  JJ jjijjitiLiJjl  ^
{ 0 (>/■£■  0* Olii  o!
They are really different  only in the degree of nearness,  and not in its 
foundation.  The nearest  among  them to Allah Almighty  is the one who has the 
best knowledge  of Him among  them;  and the one who has the best knowledge  of 
Him among  them should  be the one who worships  Him most among  them.  
That's  because  the one who has real knowledge  of Him never  worships  anyone  
else other  than Him.
The regularity  is the basis of the divisions  which  is required  from  every  type of 
people.  Since the purpose  (of regular  divisions)  is to change the internal  
characteristics,  it should  be known  that the acts which  are done only once are of 
little influence,  if such influence  is really felt. The concrete  impact  results  from  
the totality  (of regular  acts). Thus,  if there  is no concrete  impact  to be produced  
from  an act, which  should  be followed  by a second  and a third at short  intervals,  
of a surety,  the first impact  would  vanish,  and the doer comes to be like a 
jurisprudent,  who has the intention  to be a self-jurisprudent,  a rank which  he 
could  not attain  unless  he repeats  the act so many  times  and with regularity.  If he 
is excessive  in repeating  an act on a night, and then he does not do it for a 
month,  or say for a week, after which  he returns  to repeat  it excessively  on a 
night, this would have no influence  upon him, even though  if he does this 
amount  regularly  along  many  nights  with no interruption,  it would  have a great  
impact  on him.


Page 674:
672 The quarter  of the acts of worship
For the sake of this mystery,  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" said: "The  dearest  deed to Allah  Almighty  is that which  one 
does regularly,  no matter  little it might  be." When  A'ishah  "Allah  be pleased  with  
her" was asked  about  the deed of The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him",  she said: "He used to do deeds  regularly,  and whenever  he 
did a certain  deed,  he would  become  firm on doing  it." for the same  reason  also,  
The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "He,  who  
is accustomed,  by virtue of Allah Almighty,  to do an certain  act of worship,  
which  he leaves  later out of disgust,  Allah Almighty  hates him." This was the 
reason  for his supererogatory  prayer  after  Asr (obligatory  prayer),  in lieu of those  
two rak'ahs  which  he missed  when he was occupied  by the delegate  which  he 
received.  Afterwards,  he kept praying  them regularly  after Asr prayer,  but in his 
house  and not in the mosque,  lest the people  would  imitate  him, according  to the 
narration  on the authority  of A'ishah  and Umm  Salamah  "Allah  be pleased  with  
both".
You  might  raise the following  question:  "Could  anyone  else imitate  him in that 
conduct,  although  it might  be at a time at which  prayer  is undesirable?"  it should  
be known  that the three  causes  which  we've  introduced  of (offering  prayer  at the 
time of) undesirability,  to avoid the imitation  of the sun worshippers,  and the 
prostration  at the time of the emergence  of the Satan's  horn,  or to take rest from  
worship  for fear of experiencing  tedium,  could not happen  to him "Peace  be 
upon  him".  But anyone  else could  not be compared  to him in that respect,  as is 
attested  by his offering  those  (rak'ahs)  in the home,  lest they  would  imitate  him.
CHAPTER  TWO:
ON THE FACILITATING  WAYS  OF STANDING  AT NIGHT  FOR PRAYER;  
THE NIGHTS  TO WHICH  GIVING  LIFE  BY STANDING  IS DESIRABLE;  THE  
EXCELLENCE  OF GIVING  LIFE  TO THE NIGHT  AND  THE PERIOD  
BETWEEN  BOTH  EVENING  PRAYERS;  AND THE WAY  OF DIVIDING  
NIGHT  INTO  REGULAR  DIVISIONS
The Excellence  Of Giving  Life To The Period  Between  
Both Evening  Prayers
It is narrated  on the authority  of A'ishah  "Allah  be pleased  with her" that The  
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "The best  
prayer  in the Sight of Allah  Almighty  is Maghrib  (Sunset)  prayer,  which  He has 
reduced  neither  to a traveller  nor to a resident:  it is therewith  that He has opened  
the night  prayer,  and ended  the daylight  prayers.  He, who offers  Maghrib  prayer,  
followed  by a two-rak'ah  prayer,  Allah Almighty  builds  for him a palace  in the 
Garden  (the narrator  says: 'I do not know  whether  from  gold or from  silver'),  and 
he, who offers  four rak'ahs  after  it, his sins for twenty  or even forty (according  to 
another  version)  years are forgiven  for him." It is narrated  on the authority  of 
both Umm  Salamah  and Abu Hurairah  "Allah  be pleased  with them"  that The  
Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "He, who  
offers  six rak'ahs  following  Maghrib  prayer,  (the reward  of) it becomes  equal to


Page 675:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions 673
(that of) a whole  year of religious  service,  or (he receives  the same reward)  as if 
he has stood  (for night  supererogatory  prayer)  on the Night  of Power."
It is further  narrated  on the authority  of Sa'id Ibn Jubair  from Thawban  that 
The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said: "He, who  
restrains  himself  in the mosque  where  there is a congregation  of praying  people  
in the period  between  both Maghrib  and Isha' prayer,  during  which  he do not 
speak but with prayer  or recitation  of the Qur'an,  it is incumbent  upon Allah  
Almighty  to build for him two palaces  in the Garden,  each is as long as (a 
distance  to be covered  in) one hundred-year  journey,  and in the area between  
them,  there  will be planted  gardens,  (so much  expansive)  that if the people  of this 
world go round them, they would extend to imply them all." According  to 
another  narration,  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" said: "He, who offers  ten rak'ahs  in the period  between  both Maghrib  and 
Isha' prayers,  Allah Almighty  builds for him a palace in the Garden."  Umar  
commented:  "Then,  our palaces  (in the Garden)  will be so many  O Messenger  of 
Allah!"  on that the Messenger  of Allah said: "Of a surety,  (what  is with) Allah  
Almighty  is more  bountiful  and He is most  Generous  and Bounteous."
It is narrated  on the authority  of Anas Ibn Malik  "Allah  be pleased  with him"  
that he said: The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon him"  
said: "He, who offers  Maghrib  prayer  in congregadon,  and follow  it with a two-  
rak'ah prayer,  and does not speak with anything  of die affairs of this world  
(outside  the prayer)  in the period  between  both,  and in the first rak'ah  of those  
two he recites  the Opening  of the Book, the starting  ten Holy Verses  of Al- 
Baqarah,  two from its middle,  i.e. Allah's  saying:  "And your God is One God:  
there  is no god but He, Most  Gracious,  Most  Merciful,  Behold!  In the creation  of 
the heavens  and the earth;  in the alternation  of the Night  and the Day; in the 
sailing  of the ships through  the Ocean  for the profit  of mankind;  in the rain 
which  Allah  sends  down  from the skies,  and the life which  He gives therewith  to 
an earth  that is dead;  in the beasts  of all kinds  that He scatters  through  the earth;  
in the change  of the winds and the clouds which they trail like their slaves  
between  the sky and the earth,  (here)  indeed  are Signs for a people  that are wise"  
(Al-Baqarah  163:164)
JojSflj  Jj oj *|p ** ^ V J ‘7
iLUl  J> iul* JjiI Jlilt Lh jlfDIj  JJ 11
1
, f'
C Laerf t
l
And: "Say: He is Allah, the One and Only" fifteen times, and then he 
performs  bowing  and (two prostrations)  after which  he stands  and recite in the 
second  rak'ah  the Holy  Verse  of the Throne,  and the two Holy  Verses  after  it, up 
to Allah's saying: "They will be Companions  of the Fire, to dwell therein  
(forever)"  (Al-Baqarah  257)


Page 676:
674 The quarter  of the acts of worship
„ * . * ~ t * * * * ' i*jlDl  y^U>v^S>  \ dLiljl f
The three  concluding  Holy  Verses  of Al-Baqarah,  i.e. from  Allah's  saying:  "To 
Allah  belongs  all that is in the heavens  and on earth"  (Al-Baqarah  284)
4. kH '■ (j, (4 ^ 4JJ jt^ V
Up to the end, and: "Say: He is Allah,  the One and Only"  fifteen  times..."he  
receives  as much  reward  as is beyond  calculation  as described  in the narration.
Kurz Ibn Wabarah,  and he was one of the Substitutes  (Abdal)  said: "I said to 
Al-Khadir  (in a dream):  "Teach  me something  to do every  night."  He said to me: 
"When  you offer  Maghrib  prayer,  keep standing  in prayer  until the time of Isha',  
during  which  speak  with none,  and rather  devote  yourself  wholeheartedly  to your  
prayer  in which  you are, and conclude  each two rak'ah  with the end salutation,  
and recite  in each rak'ah  the Opening  of the Book  once  and "Say: He is Allah,  the 
One and Only"  thrice,  and when  you finish  from your prayer,  turn away to your  
home,  and speak  with none,  and then offer a two-rak'ah  prayer  (in your house)  
and recite  in each rak'ah  the Opening  of the Book  and "Say: He is Allah,  the One  
and Only"  seven  times,  and after your end salutation  fall in prostration  and ask 
for Allah's  Forgiveness  seven times and say seven times: "Glory  be to Ailah;  
Praise  be to Allah;  there  is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah;  Allah  is Greater;  
and there  is neither  might  nor power  but with Allah,  Most  High,  Most  Great."
Then,  raise your head from prostration,  be straight  in sitting  and raise your  
hands and say: "O (Allah) Ever-Living,  Self-Subsisting,  Eternal,  Lord of 
Majesty,  Glory and Honour!  O God of the foremost  as well as the last 
(generations)!  O (Allah)  Most  Gracious,  Most  Merciful  in both this world  and 
the hereafter!  O my Lord!  O my Lord!  O my Lord!  O Allah!  O Allah!  O Allah!"  
then, stand  while  raising  your  hands  and supplicate  with the same supplication.  
Then  lie on your  right side wherever  you like facing  the direction  of the Qiblah,  
and invoke  Allah's  Prayer  and Blessing  upon  the Prophet  "Peace  be upon  him"  
and keep invoking  Allah's Prayer and Blessing  upon him until slumber  
overtakes  you." I said to him: "I like that you would  tell me from whom  you 
have learnt  that." He said to me: "I was present  when Muhammad  "Peace  be 
upon him" was taught  this supplication  which  was revealed  to him, and I was 
with him; and since this took place at my presence,  I learnt  it from him who  
revealed  it to him."
It is said, in this respect,  that he who offers  this prayer  and supplicates  with  
this supplication  regularly,  with certainty  of faith and true intention,  will not 
come  out of this world  (by death)  before  he sees The Messenger  of Allah  "Allah's  
blessing  and peace  be upon  him"  in his dream.  One of the people  did so, and saw 
in a dream  as if he was admitted  to the Garden,  where  he saw some Prophets,  
and saw in it The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be upon  him",  
who talked  to him, and taught  him.
In total, there are so many  narration  which  tell about  the excellence  of giving  
life to the period  between  both Evening  prayers,  to the extent  that once it wasf


Page 677:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions  
said to Ubaidullah,  the freed slave of The Messenger  of Allah "Allah ’s blessing  
and peace be upon him": "Did The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and 
peace be upon him" command  (you) to offer prayer  other than the obligatory  
written  prayers?"  he said: "(The supererogatory  prayer  in the period)  between  
both Maghrib  and Isha'."  The Messenger  of Allah "Allah's  blessing  and peace  be 
upon him" further  said: "He, who offers  prayer  (in the period)  between  Maghrib  
and Isha' will have offered  the prayer  of those  who are oft-returning  (to Allah  in 
repentance)."It  is narrated  on the authority  of Al-Aswad  that he said: I've never  
visited  Ibn Mas'ud  at this dme (between  Maghrib  and Isha 1) but that I found  him 
praying.  I asked  him about  that, and he said: "Yes,  this is the hour (in which  the 
people  become)  heedless."
Anas  (Ibn Malik)  was regular  on offering  it, describing  the prayer  therein  as 
a prayer  in the rising  by night,  for it lies in its first portion,  and he told that it 
is in connection  with it that Allah's  saying  was revealed:  " Their limbs do 
forsake  their beds of sleep, the while they call on their Lord, in Fear and 
Hope."  (As-Sajdah  16)675
i l^-bj  £>■ 0 ^ j f
It is narrated  that Ahmad  Ibn Abu Al-Hawari  said: I asked  Abu Sulaiman  Ad- 
Darani:  "Is it dearer  in your sight that I observe  fast by day and have my meal in 
the period  between  both Maghrib  and Isha' prayer,  or to leave fasting  by day, and 
give life (by prayer)  to the period  between  both?"  he said: "Combine  both."  I 
said: "But if it is not available  to me (what  should  I choose?)"  on that he said:  
"Then,  leave fasting  by day, and offer prayer in the period between  both  
(Maghrib  and Isha')."
The Excellence  Of Standing  At Might  (For Prayer)
From  amongst  the Holy  Verses  which  tell about  the excellence  of standing  at 
night (for offering  supererogatory  prayers),  a mention  might be made of the 
following:  Allah Almighty  says: " Your  Lord does know  that you stand forth (to 
prayer)  nigh two-thirds  of the night,  or half the night,  or a third of the night,  and 
so does a party  of those  with you. But Allah does appoint  Night  and Day in due 
measure.
to you (in mercy):  read you, therefore,  of the Qur ’an as much  as may be easy for 
you. He knows  that there  may be (some)  among  you in ill-health;  others  travelling  
through  the land, seeking  of Allah's  bounty;  yet others  fighting  in Allah's  Cause.  
Read you, therefore,  as much of the Qur ’an as may be easy (for you); and 
establish  regular  Prayer  and give regular  Charity;  and loan to Allah a Beautiful  
Loan. And whatever  good you send forth for your souls, you shall find it in 
Allah's  Presence,  yea, better  and greater,  in Reward,  and seek you the Grace  of 
Allah:  for Allah  is Oft-Forgiving,  Most  Merciful."  (Al-Muzzammil  20)
jjT  jjju  iuij jj Jji ^ jpi fyu dlli SIjj o! ?
"’ .j- j« ^ ^ ^^  ^ * f *-• f t ^ -i -»
O' ob_y*l'  Cr? L o' j^d'3He knows  that you are unable  to keep count  thereof.  So He has turned


Page 678:
676 The quarter  of the acts of worship
S. ^ Jrr* <i Oj^p-'o  $ <j? 4 o_ka=4 OjA^’o
b~L>- Ajjl 1 ^313 5jSjJ 1 bj I c3 ® '3 b* AJJI J-^P OJ .u£ JL>- j£L~Jlj  *)} i y jJu L« J
4 $? '& oj ^ U^Tj  Vf (^'3  8*-
He further  says in die same Surah:  "Truly  the rising  by night  is most potent  
for governing  (the soul),  and most  suitable  for (framing)  the Word  (of Prayer  and 
Praise)."  (Al-Muzzammil  6)
•'© f35lj h^>3 ‘U-wb <jl )?>
He also says: " Their  limbs  do forsake  their beds of sleep,  the while they call 
on their  Lord,  in Fear and Hope."  (As-Sajdah  16)
<£ (®) ULbj  li> ^4j l-Ja ^
He Almighty  says too: "Is one who worships  devoudy  during  the hours  of the 
night prostrating  himself  or standing  (in adoration),  who takes heed of the 
Hereafter,  and who places  his hope  in the Mercy  of his Lord,  (like one who does  
not)?"  (Az-Zumar  9)
„ j x ^ , , „ t * ' , * $ * * ■'(•<* ' ’■> ^ •» '*•* — f« f •* s i
Qyd xj iJiA)  I (_£  jblo j j 1 1 wLb' LL 13j I -Ls*- lL AA L b I c d-^-13  j_& l )j>
j Lb>)
Allah Almighty  further  says in this respect:  "Those  who spend  the night in 
adoration  of their  Lord prostrate  and standing."  (Al-Furqan  64)
| * ^ j ^ /
4 ’ wL^e— 0^13  f
Allah  also says: "Nay,  seek (Allah's)  help with patient  perseverance  and prayer:  it is 
indeed  hard,  except  to those  who bring  a lowly  spirit."  (Al-Baqarah  45)
4 W*^b ?
It is said that this refers  to the standing  at night  (in adoration),  with the patient  
perseverance  on which  Allah's  Help is sought  for self-mortification.
From  amongst  the Prophetic  narrations  in support  of that, a mention  might  
be made of the following:  It is narrated  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah:  
Allah's  Apostle ” Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "Satan  puts  
three knots at the back of the head of any of you if he is asleep.  When one 
wakes up and remembers  Allah, one knot is undone.  When one performs  
ablution,  the second  knot is undone.  When  one stands  (for prayer)  all the knots  
are then undone  and one gets up energetic  with a good heart in the morning  
because  of the goodness  he has received.  If he does not do so, he would  get up 
lazy and with the mischievous  heart since he received  no good (with The  
Satan's  knots  remaining  on his head's  back)."  According  to another  narration,  a 
mention  was made in the presence  of Allah's  Apostle ” Allah ’s blessing  and 
peace  be upon him" of a man  
until morning  comes  upon him. He said: "This is a man in whose  ears Satan  
urinates."■* 3c.—, i -' 'b-? ' j
who was in the habit  of sleeping  the whole  night


Page 679:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions
It is further  narrated  that Allah's  Apostle ” Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  
him" said: "Verily,  Satan has with him something  to give to a man through  his 
nostrils,  another  through  his tongue,  and atoms  to spread  over his body: if he 
gives a servant  from that which  is poured  through  his nostrils,  he will come to 
have bad manners;  and if he gives that which  is licked  by the tongue,  he will 
to have foul and offensive  language;  and if he spreads  from the atoms  over his 
body,  he will keep sleeping  for the whole  night  until morning  comes  upon  him."  
It is further  narrated  that Allah's  Aposde ” Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon  
him" said: "A two-rak'ah  prayer  which  one offers  at the middle  of the night is 
much  better  than this world  and all that it contains;  and had it not been for fear 
that I should  make it difficult  upon my nation,  surely,  I would  have enjoined  it 
upon  them."
According  to an authentic  narration  on the authority  of Jabir,  Allah's  Apostle ” 
Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "There  is a certain  hour at night,  
and no Muslim  servant  agrees  with it, and asks Allah for good, (or for good of 
this world and the hereafter,  and it occurs  every night, according  to another  
version)  but that He Almighty  gives it to him." It is narrated  on the authority  of 
Al-Mughirah  Ibn Shu'bah  that Allah's  Apostle ” Allah ’s blessing  and peace be 
upon him" was in the habit  of standing  at night for a long time until the skin of 
his feet was cleaved,  thereupon  it was said: "Has not Allah Almighty  forgiven  for 
you all of your earlier  and later sins?"  on that he said: "Then,  should  I not be a 
thankful  servant?"  This is, as attested  from the significance  of the narration,  a 
homonymy  of the loftiness  of rank, since gratitude  is a direct cause of giving  
more  (blessings  and favours).  Allah  Almighty  says (in confirmation  to that): "And  
remember!  your Lord caused  to be declared  (publicly):  "If you are grateful,  I will 
add more  (blessings  and favours)  unto you."  (Abraham  7)
i ;.p oj crJj677
turn
i
to M3 f
It is further  narrated  (on the authority  of Abu Hurairah)  that Allah's  Apostle ” 
Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him" said to him: "O Abu Hurairah!  If you 
like to receive  Allah's  Mercy  as living  and dead,  as buried  in the grave  and raised  
(from dead on the Day of Judgement),  you should  stand at night and offer  
supererogatory  prayers,  seeking  the Good Pleasure  of your Lord. O Abu  
Hurairah!  Offer  prayer  in the different  corners  of your house,  perchance  the light  
of your house  becomes  in the (sight  of those  of the) heaven  like the light of the 
stars in the sight of the inhabitants  of this world."  Allah's Apostle”  Allah ’s 
blessing  and peace  be upon  him" further  said: "I advise  you to be in the habit of 
standing  at night (for supererogatory  prayer)  for this was the practice  of the good  
before  you: indeed,  standing  at night (for prayer)  is an act of righteous  men
worship  which  draws  one near unto Allah Almighty,  plots out sins (from  one's  
account),  averts  diseases  from the body,  and forbids  one to do evil."
Allah's  Apostle ” Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "No man  
always  offers  (supererogatory)  prayer  at night,  but slumber  overpowers  him (and  
hinders  him) from offering  it, but that the reward  of his prayer  is written  to him,


Page 680:
678 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
and his sleep  is regarded  as an object  of charity  to be given  to him."  According  to 
another  narration,  Allah's  Apostle ” Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him" said 
to Abu Dharr: "If you are going to set out on journey,  would you not get 
preparations  for it?" he answered  in the affirmative,  thereupon  he said to him:  
"What  then about  the preparations  for the journey  on the way to the Day of 
Judgement?  Should  I not tell you, O Abu Dharr,  about  what might  benefit  you 
on the Day of Judgement?"  he said: "Yes,  let my father  and mother  sacrifice  their  
lives for you."  He said: "Observe  fast on a very hot day to suffice  you for the Day  
of Resurrection,  offer  a two-rak'ah  prayer  at the darkness  of the night  to suffice  
you for the loneliness  of the grave,  perform  Hajj to suffice  you for the great  
calamity,  and offer an object  of charity  to an indigent,  a word of truth to say 
(when  it is needed),  or a word  of evil of which  you keep silent."
It is narrated  that during  the lifetime  of Allah's  Apostle ” Allah ’s blessing  and 
peace  be upon  him" there was a man, who used, whenever  the people  went to 
bed, and it was still, to stand  to offer  prayer  and recite  the Qur'an  and say: "O my 
Lord!  deliver  me from the fire (of Hell)!"  a mention  of that was made  to Allah's  
Apostle ” Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him" who said: "When  it is time for 
this (man  to do so) inform  me." He came to him and listened  to his invocation.  
When  it was morning  he said to him: "O so and so! Why should  you not ask 
Allah  (to admit  you to) the Garden?"  he said: "O Messenger  of Allah!  I'm fitting  
for that, and I think my deed is not to reach such (a degree  as to get me ask for 
that)."  It was not after a short  time Allah's  Apostle ” Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be 
upon him" stayed  that Gabriel  "Peace  be upon  him" descended  and said to him:  
"Tell so and so that Allah  Almighty  has delivered  him from the fire (of Hell) and 
admitted  him to the Garden."
It is further  narrated  that Gabriel  "Peace  be upon him" said to Allah's  
Apostle”  Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him":  "How  good  man Ibn Umar  is, 
would  that he offers  prayer  at night!"  when  Allah's  Apostle ” Allah ’s blessing  and 
peace be upon him" told him about that, he came to stand at night for 
supererogatory  prayer  regularly.  Nafi' (his freed slave) said: He used to offer  
prayer  at night  and then say: "O Nafi'!  has the time of early  dawn  come  upon  us?"  
I would  say: "No." then, he would  stand and continue  his prayer,  and then say: 
"O Nafi'! has the time of the early dawn  come  upon us?" I would  say (if it was 
time of early dawn):  "Yes."  Then,  he would  sit and pray for Allah's  Forgiveness  
until dawn  would  rise.
It is narrated  that Aii Ibn Abu Talib said: One night,  (the Prophet)  Yahya,  son 
of Zakariyya  "Peace  be upon both"  ate his fill from parley  bread until he slept,  
and was hindered  from  offering  his night  regular  division,  and kept sleeping  until  
morning  came upon him. Allah  Almighty  revealed  to him: "O Yahya!  Have  you 
found  a home  better  than Mine,  or have you found  neighbourhood  better  than  
Mine?  By My Power  and Glory,  O Yahya!  If you see Paradise,  your fat would  
dissolve,  and your soul would  perish  out of longing  for it; and if you see (the fire 
of) Hell,  your fat would  dissolve,  and your eyes would  shed (blood  and) pus after  
tears,  and you would  come  to put on skin after  clothing."


Page 681:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions
It was said to Allah's  Aposde ” Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him": "So 
and So always  offers  prayer  at night, and when morning  comes  upon him, he 
commits  theft." On that he said: "Verily,  such (of night prayers  as) he offers  
would  forbid  him (to commit  theft)."  It is narrated  (by Ibn Majah  and others)  
that Allah's  Aposde ” Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him" said: "Allah  
bestows  mercy upon a man who stands and offers prayer  at night, and then  
awakens  his wife to offer prayer,  and if she refuses,  he sprinkle  water  into her 
face." Allah's  Aposde ” Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him" further  said:  
"Allah  bestows  mercy  upon a woman  who stands  to offer prayer  at night,  and 
then awakens  her husband,  and if he refuses,  she sprinkle  water  into his face."
It is narrated  that Allah's  Aposde ” Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him"  
said: "He, who gets up and awakens  his spouse  at night,  and both offer  a two-  
rak'ah  prayer,  they will be enlisted  among  those  who celebrate  (the Praises  and 
Glory of) Allah so much, be he male or female."  Allah's  Aposde ” Allah ’s 
blessing  and peace  be upon him" further  said: "The best prayer  to be offered  
after  the obligatory  written  is (that  which  one offers  at his) standing  at night."  It 
is narrated  on the authority  of Umar Ibn Al-Khattab  that he said: Allah's  
Aposde ” Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "He, who sleeps  (and  
hindered  by slumber)  from offering  all or some of his nighdy  regular  division,  
and then he recites  it in the period  between  both Fajr and Zhuhr  prayers,  (the 
reward  of) it will be written  for him in the same way as if he has recited  it at 
night."
As far as the stories  handed  down  from the companions  and their followers  
are concerned,  a mendon  might  be made of the following:  It is narrated  that 
sometimes  Umar  "Allah  be pleased  with him" came upon a certain  Holy Verse  
from his nighdy  regular  division,  because  of which  he would  fall unconscious  
(out of fear and terror),  and remain  ill for a long time to the extent  that he would  
be visited  for so many  days, in the same way as a patient  is visited.  It was the 
habit of Ibn Mas'ud  "Allah  be pleased  with him",  whenever  it was still (because  
of sleep),  to stand (and offer  prayer  at night),  and his voice  would  be audible  like 
the sound  of bees until morning  would  come  upon  him.
It is said that one night, Sufyan  Ath-Thawri  ate his fill and then said: "If a 
donkey  is given  more fodder,  the work that is required  from him will be more."  
Then,  he kept standing  during  the whole  of that night (and offering  prayer)  until  
morning  came upon him. It was the habit of Tawus  (the freed slave of Ibn 
Abbas)  that whenever  he lay on his bed, he would  turn on it in the same  way as a 
grain  would  turn on a frying  vessel,  after  which  he would  get up and keep praying  
until morning  would  come  upon him, and say: "Verily,  the remembrance  of the 
Hell dissipates  the slumber  of the worshippers."  According  to Al-Hassan:  "We do 
not know  there is a deed much  better  than the suffering  from (sleeplessness  at) 
night  and spending  the property  (in Allah's  Cause)."  It was said to him: "What  is 
the matter  of the performers  of night  prayer  that they are the most  good-looking  
among  the people?"  he said: "That's  because  they (favour  to) be alone with  
(Allah)  Most Gracious,  thereupon  (Allah)  Most Gracious  dressed  them in light  
from His Light."679


Page 682:
The quarter  of the acts of worship
One of die good righteous  men returned  from journey,  and the bed was 
prepared  for him on which  he slept,  until he missed  his nightly  regular  division.  
Afterwards,  he took oath not to sleep on a bed once again.  Whenever  the night  
was dark upon  Abd Al-Aziz  Ibn Rawwad,  he would  go to his bed, place  his hand  
over it and say: "Verily,  you (O bed) are soft, even though,  by Allah, in the 
Garden,  there is such (of thrones)  as is softer  than you." Then,  he would  keep  
offering  prayer  for die whole  night.  Al-Fudail  said: "When  the first portion  of the 
night  comes  upon  me, I will be scared  by its length,  but when  1 start to recite  the 
Qur'an,  the morning  comes  upon me, and I've not satisfied  my desire yet."  
According  to Al-Hassan:  "A man might  commit  a sin, because  of which  he is 
forbidden  the (blessing  of) standing  at night."
According  to Al-Fudail  once again: "If you could not do the service  of 
standing  at night (for supererogatory  prayers)  and observing  fasts by day, you 
should  then know  that you are cut off (Allah's  Blessings  and Favours),  and your  
sins and mistakes  are so much."  It was the habit of Silah Ibn Ashyam  "Allah's  
Mercy  be upon him" to keep praying  for the whole  night,  and whenever  it was 
the time of early dawn,  he would  say (by way of supplication):  "O my God! It is 
not befitting  for the like of me to ask for the Garden,  but (at least) deliver  me by 
Your  Mercy  from  the fire (of Hell)."
A man said to one of the sages: "I weaken to stand at night (for 
supererogatory  prayers)."  He said to him: "O my brother!  Cease  to disobey  Allah  
Almighty  by day, perchance  you would (be able to) stand at night (for 
supererogatory  prayer)."  Al-Hassan  Ibn Salih had a slave-girl  whom  he sold to a 
certain  family.  When  it was the middle  of the night,  the slave-girl  got up and said:  
"O household!  Come  to prayer!"  they said: "Has  morning  come  upon  us? Has the 
dawn  risen?"  she said: "Do you not offer  but the obligatory  written  prayers?"  they  
said: "Yes."  She returned  to Al-Hassan  and said: "O my master!  You've  sold me 
to a family  who do not offer  but the obligatory  written  prayer.  So, please,  take me 
back!"  he then took her back.
Ar-Rabie  said: I spent  many  nights  in the house  of Shafi ’i "Allah  be pleased  
with him", during  which he slept but for a few time every night."  Abu Al- 
Juwairiyah  said: I accompanied  Abu Hanifah  "Allah  be pleased  with him" for 
nearly  six months,  during  which  he never  laid his side on the ground  for a night  
(in reference  to his continuous  sleeplessness  and standing  for night  vigils).  Abu  
Hanifah  was in the habit of giving  life (through  standing  for night  vigil) to half  
the night.  Once,  he came  upon a people  who said: "This man is in the habit  of 
giving  life (through  standing  for night  vigil) to the whole  night."  On that he said:  
"I feel shy of being  described  by what I do not do." After  that, he came to give  
life (through  standing)  to the whole  night. It is narrated  that he had no bed to 
sleep  on at night.
It is said that Malik  Ibn Dinar  kept repeating  the following  Holy Verse  for a 
whole  night until the morning  came upon him: "What!  do those  who seek after  
evil ways think that We shall hold them equal with those who believe  and do 
righteous  deeds,  that equal will be their life and their death?  Ill is the judgment  
that they make."  (Al-Jathiyah  21)680


Page 683:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions -------
{*“* li "s ' \jL*-£j  i IC JiAfif 0! QjLLJUT  I_«681
f - ’ f ' .f-r -
t -T ■ L * ll *3
Al-Mughirah  Ibn Habib said: I caught  glimpse  of Malik Ibn Dinar who  
performed  ablution  after Isha' prayer,  and went to his praying  place,  and gripped  
his beard  and was throttled  by tears, thereupon  he went on saying:  "O my God!  
Forbid  Malik  with his hoary  (beard  and hair) to the fire (of Hell)!  O my God! You  
have knowledge  of the inhabitants  of the Garden,  and the denizens  of the fire (of 
Hell): which one of both will Malik be? And which abode  of both will be of 
Malik?"  he kept saying  the same  until the dawn  rose.
Malik Ibn Dinar  said: One night,  the fulfillment  of my sexual  desire  diverted  
from my nighdy  regular  division,  and I then slept.  Behold!  I saw in a dream  a 
girl, the pretdest  of women  I've never  seen, in whose  hand there was a piece of 
skin. She said to me: "Do you read well?" I answered  in the affirmadve,  
thereupon  she gave it to me and I read the following  (which  was written  in the 
form of poedc  verses):
"Have  the pleasures  and desires  (in this world)  diverted  you from the white  
pretty  affable  girls in the gardens  (of Paradise)?  In it, you will abide everlasdng,  
since there will be no death  therein,  and amuse  yourself  with the pretty  girls. So, 
wake up from your sleep, for it is much better  from sleep to offer night vigils  
(Tahajjud  prayers)  with the help of the Holy  Qur'an."
It is said that Masruq  performed  Hajj,  during  which  he never  spent  a night  but 
in the prostradon  posture.  It is narrated  from Azhar  Ibn Mughith,  and he was 
one of those who used to stand (at night for supererogatory  prayers)  most  
frequendy,  that he said: I saw in a dream  a woman  which  resembled  not the 
women  of this world.  I asked  her: "Who  are you?"  she said: "One  of the beautiful  
women  of big lustrious  eyes (of the Garden)."  I said to her: "Would  you marry  
me?" she said: "Then,  demand  my hand from my Lord,  and offer  me a dower."  I 
asked  her: "What  is your dower?"  she said: "The long duration  of die night  vigils  
(Tahajjud  prayers)."
According  to Yusuf  Ibn Muhran:  I was reported  that underneath  the Throne  
(of Majesty)  there  is an angel in the form of a rooster,  whose  claws  are of pearls,  
and whose  loin is of green  aquamarine.  When  the one-third  the night  elapses,  he 
beats with his wings and cries: "Let those who are in the habit of standing  at 
night stand (for night prayers)!"  when half the night elapses,  he beats with his 
wings  and cries: "Let those  who are in the habit of offering  night  vigils stand  (to 
offer  their  vigils)!"  when  two-thirds  the night  elapses,  he beats  with his wings  and 
cries: "Let the praying  men stand (to offer prayer)!"  When  dawn  rises he beats  
with his wings  and cries: "Let the heedless  stand  having  the burdens  of their sins 
upon  them!"
It is said that Wahb  Ibn Munabbih  never  laid his side on the ground  for thirty  
years (in reference  of his continuous  sleeplessness  and standing  at night),  and he 
used to say: "It is dearer  to me to see a devil in my house  than to see a cushion:
:
<
mei
t
t
f*tNr:
&
*
2
£
*
i
£
P


Page 684:
682 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
therein,  for it induces  one to sleep." He had a small carpet  of leather,  and 
whenever  he was overpowered  by slumber,  eh would  lie his breast  over it and 
have a litde nap, after which  he would  get up to continue  his prayer.  One of the 
learned  said: I saw in a dream  the Lord of Power  and Honour,  Whom  I heard  
saying:  "By My Power,  Honour  and Glory!  I would  touch  with honour  the final  
resting  place  of Sulaiman  At-Taimi,  for indeed,  he remained  for forty  years  in the 
habit of offering  the Morning  prayer  with the same ablution  of Isha' prayer  for 
My Sake " (in reference  to the fact that he never  slept at night,  which  he used to 
spend  in prayer).  It is said that he was of the opinion  that if slumber  befogged  the 
(mind  and) heart,  the ablution  would  be broken.  It is narrated  on one of the early  
Scriptures  from Allah  Almighty  that He said: "Verily,  My servant  which  is fitting  
to be really  so is he, who never  waits,  while  standing  at night  (for supererogatory  
prayers)  the time of the rooster's  crow."
The Exposition  Of The Facilitating  Causes  Of Standing  At Night  
(For Supererogatory  Prayers)
It should  be known  that standing  at night (for supererogatory  prayers)  is 
difficult  upon  the people,  except  for him who is helped  by Allah  Almighty  meet  
its required  conditions  outwardly  and inwardly.  The outward  conditions  are four:
The first is that one should not eat so much, nor should he drink in 
abundance,  lest that would  lead him to be overpowered  by sleep,  with the result  
that standing  at night  would  become  heavy  upon  him. One of the grand  sheikhs  
used to stand  at the repast  every  night  and say: "O assembly  of seekers  (after  the 
hereafter)!  Eat not so much,  nor drink in abundance,  lest you would  sleep so 
much (and fail to stand for night  vigils),  and thus you would  grieve  so much  at 
your death."  This is, however,  the basic fundament,  i.e. to relieve  the stomach  of 
the heavy  burden  of the great  quantity  of food.
The second  is that one should  not exhaust  himself  severely  during  the day 
with  works  that might  harm  the organs  and weaken  the nerves,  for this is, indeed,  
a direct  cause  of falling  asleep.
The third is that one should  not give up the habit of taking  siesta  during  the 
day, for it is a traditional  practice  which  helps  him stand  at night.
The fourth  is that one should  not commit  sins during  the day, for this is one 
of those things which harden  the heart and hinder  it from be merciful.  It is 
narrated  that a man said to Al-Hassan:  "O Abu Sa'id! I always  spend the night  
with power  and health,  and although  I like to stand  at night  (for supererogatory  
prayers)  and prepare  (the water  for) my ablution,  I do not get up: what  is wrong  
with me?" he said to him: "It seems  that your sins (you commit  during  the day)  
deter you (from getting  up at night)."  Whenever  Al-Hassan  "Allah's  Mercy  be 
upon  him" entered  the market  and heard  the noise  and falsity  (of the people),  he 
would  say: "I think the night of those  would  be an evil night, for it seem that 
those  have no siesta  (during  the day, to help them  stand  at night)."
Ath-Thawri  said: For five months,  I was forbidden  the (privilege  of) standing!


Page 685:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions 683
at night  (of r supererogatory  prayers)  because  of a sin I committed."  It was said 
to him: "What  is that sin?" he said: "Isaw a man weeping  (in prayer)  thereupon  I 
said to myself:  "This is out of showing  off to be seen of men."  A man said: I 
entered  upon  Kurz  Ibn Wabarah  and found  him weeping,  thereupon  I asked  him:  
has the news of death  of anyone  of your family  reached  you (and it is for this 
that you are weeping)?"  he said: "It is something  more  severe."  I asked:  "Is it an 
ache which  pains you?" he said: "It is more severe  than that." I asked: "Then,  
what  is that?"  he said: "My door  is closed,  and my curtain  is hanging  down,  and I 
did not read my nightly  regular  division  last night;  and this is but for a sin I've 
committed."
That's  because  good  always  calls for good,  as well as evil calls for evil, and the 
little of anyone  of both often draws one to the much. For this reason,  Abu  
Sulaiman  Ad-Darani  said: "None  misses  a congregational  prayer  but for a sin 
(which  he commits)."  He used to say: "The nocturnal  wet dream  at night is (a 
kind of) punishment,  and the state of ceremonial  impurity  (in which  one becomes  
after having  sexual  relation  with his wife) is to drive one away (from  the honour  
of offering  the night  vigils)."  One of the learned  men said: "If you observe  fast, 
O poor man, consider  in the house  of whom  you are going  to break  your fast, 
and on which  food you are going  to eat, for a servant  might  have a meal, by 
which  his heart  changes  from the very state in which  he was (before  eating),  and 
it never  returns  to its original  state. Of a surety,  all sins in general  harden  the 
heart,  and hinder  one from  standing  at night  (for supererogatory  prayers),  and the 
most  harmful  in particular  among  them  is to have  what  is unlawful."<
4
4
i
f
t
5
C
To be sure, a lawful morsel  (of food) might  help to purify the heart and 
prompt  it to good much better  than anything  else might  do, a fact which  those  
who watch  the hearts  know  through  experience,  which  is confirmed  by law. For 
this reason,  one of them said: "How  many  a meal (from unlawful  sources)  that 
hindered  one from standing  (for supererogatory  prayers)  on a night, and how  
many  a glance  (one cast at what is unlawful  for him) which  hindered  one from  
reciting  a Holy  Surah  (from  the Qur'an);  and a servant  might  have a meal (from  
what  is unlawful),  or commit  a thing  (illegally),  because  of which  he is forbidden  
the standing  at night for a whole  year; and as well as prayer  forbids  one to do 
what is shameful  and abominable,  doing  what is shameful  forbids  one to offer  
prayer  or do the other  acts of good."c
cf
>
>
>
>
prison  custodian  for about  
thirty-two  years,  during  which  I asked  whomever  was arrested  at night  whether  
he had offered  Isha' prayer  in congregation,  and they answered  in the negative.  
This is to highlight  the fact that the blessing  of the congregation  (in which  one 
should  offer  prayer)  forbids  one to commit  what  is shameful  and abominable.
There  are also four internal  facilitations  which  go as follows:One of the prison  custodians  said: "I've been
The first pertains  to the heart's  freedom  from rancor  against  the Muslims,  
from innovations  of heresies  (which  have no reference  in the religion),  and


Page 686:
684 The quarter  of the acts of worship
from being  engaged  in the unnecessary  affairs  of this world.  That's  because  it is 
not easy for one involved  in disposing  of the affairs  of this world to stand at 
night (for supererogatory  prayers),  and even if he stands,  his mind will be busy  
in tliought  about  his own concerns,  and it will only go round  one's suspicions  
and suggestions.  It is in the like of this that it is said: "The porter  tells me that 
you are sleeping,  and even whenever  you wake up, you remain  in the state of 
sleep."
The second  pertains  to die heart's  fear (of the terrors  of the hereafter),  and 
making  short  die hope.  To be sure, if one thinks  of the formidable  terrors  of the 
hereafter,  and the lowest  bottoms  of (the fire of) Hell, he would  remain  sleepless,  
and become  more careful,  in confirmation  to what Tawus  said in this context:  
"Verily,  the remembrance  of (the fire of) Hell dissipates  the sleep of the 
worshippers."  It is related  from a slave in Basrah  called Suhaib  that he used to 
stand  the whole  night  (for supererogatory  prayers),  thereupon  his mistress  said to 
him: "Your  standing  for the whole  night has a negative  effect on your work  
during  the day." He replied:  "Whenever  Suhaib  remembers  the fire (of Hell),  
sleep  does not come  to him (because  of great  fear and reflection)."
Another  slave used to keep standing  for the whole  night  (in sendee  and vigil),  
and when  he was discussed  about  that he said: "Verily,  whenever  I remember  the 
fire (of Hell),  my fear becomes  severe;  and whenever  I remember  the Garden,  my 
longing  for it becomes  so much great: and in both cases I could not be able to 
sleep."  According  to Dhun-Nun,  the Egyptian  "Allah  be merciful  to him": "The  
Holy  Qur'an  has forbidden,  with its promises  (of the Garden)  and threats  (of the 
fire) the eyes to shut for sleep at night.  These  (people)  have understood  well the 
speech  of (Allah)  the Glorious  Sovereign,  thereupon  their necks  lowered  down  to 
Him in submission."
They also said in a form of poetic  verses:  "O one who sleeps  and becomes  
heedless  for a long time: of a surety,  your sleep so much  results  in your grief  (in 
sigh for such of time as you've  wasted).  To be sure, you will find in the grave,  
once  you come  down  to it (after  leaving  this world),  a long time to lie down  after  
your death.  You will find also therein  a resting  place that is prepared  for you,  
congruent  with such of your good deeds  or sins as you've  done (in the world).  
Do you feel, by your spending  the night  in such a state of sleep,  secure  from the 
angel of death (lest he would  take your soul)? How scary is that which  such a 
feeler  of safety  received  during  the night  which  he spent  (asleep)!"
I bn Al-Mubarak  said also the two following  poetic  verses:  "Whenever  the 
night becomes  dark, those (seekers  for the hereafter)  suffers  the difficulty  (of 
standing  for supererogatory  prayers)  during  the whole  of it until dawn  rises upon  
them while they are still bowing  (in their prayers).  Verily,  the fear (which  they  
experience  of the terrors  of the hereafter)  dissipates  their sleep, thereupon  they  
keep standing  (during  the whole night),  while those who feel secure (against  
Allah's  Punishment)  are sleeping."


Page 687:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions  
The third is that685
one should  know the excellence  of standing  at night (for 
supererogatory  prayers),  through  going through  the Holy Verses,  Prophetic  
tradidons  and narrations,  and sayings  (of the companions)  which  confirm  that,  
perchance  his hope and longing  for its reward  might  prompt  him to perform  it, 
and incite  him to domore  and more,  in desire  for attaining  the (highest  degrees  
in the) Gardens  (of eternity).  It is related  that one of the righteous  men returned  
from a holy battle (in Allah's  Cause,  and his wife had prepared  her throne  (for 
him) and sat in expectation  for his arrival.  But (when  he arrived)  he entered  the 
mosque  (and did not go to the house)  and remained  in prayer  (for the whole  
night) until morning  came upon him. His wife said to him: "We've  been sitting  
waiting  you for a long time. But when you arrived,  you kept praying  until  
morning."  On that he said: "By Allah!  I remained  for the whole  night  thinking  of 
one of the beautiful5
women  of big lustrious  eyes who belong  to the Garden,  
thereupon  I forgot  my wife and house;  and therefore,  I kept standing  (in prayer)  
for the whole  night  in longing  for her." i
tThe fourth,  which is the most honoured  cause (of standing  in prayer  at 
night)  is the love for Allah  Almighty,  and the strong  faith in the fact that during  
his standing  at night,  he never  utters  a letter  but that therewith  he talks privately  
to Allah Almighty,  Who sees him well, and has best knowledge  of such of 
thoughts  as occur to his mind, which  in themselves  are a kind of discourse  
through  which Allah Almighty  communicates  with him. If one loves Allah  
Almighty,  he inevitably  comes  to love to be alone  with him, and take pleasure  
of having  discourse  with Him; and it is the pleasure  of such discourse  with the 
One Whom  he loves that prompts  him to prolong  the standing  at night (in 
prayer).
The notion  of this pleasure  should  not be relegated,  since  it is attested  by both  
intellect  and handed  down  tradition.  As far as the intellect  is concerned,  consider,  
for instance,  the love which  one might  have for a person  because  of his (or her) 
beauty,  or for a king because  of his benefaction  and property,  and how such lover  
takes pleasure  of sitting  and having  private  discourse  with him (or her) alone,  to 
the extent  that he would  remain  sleepless  for the whole  night.  But, you might  sav: 
"Of a surety,  one takes pleasure  of looking  at what is beautiful,  and it is known  
that Allah  Almighty  could  not be visible."  It should  be known  that if the beautiful  
object  of love is behind  a screen  or lives in a dark house  (and it is impossible  to 
him), the lover will take pleasure  of living in his neighbourhood,  without  
being  able to see him, or having  any further  desire,  and rather  he will be blessed  
when (such beloved)  shows  love for him, and makes  a mention  of him at his 
hearing,  even though  such love might  be known  well to him.
You then might  also say: "Indeed,  one expects  for and thus takes pleasure  of 
the answer  of such beloved,  and of a surety,  Allah's  Speech  could  not be heard  
(by a human  being)."  It should  be known  that if he knows  that He really  does not 
answer  him, and rather  keeps  silent  of him, there  will remain  for him the pleasurei
i
t
c
c
c
>
(\
y see
>
>
>:
I


Page 688:
686 The quarter  of the acts of worship
of offering  his different  states  and raising  his true intention  to Him,  let alone  the 
believer  whose  faith is certain,  who hears from  Allah  Almighty  all that occurs  to 
his mind during  his private  discourse,  of which  he takes pleasure.  Likewise,  he 
who sits alone with the king, and offers to him his needs and questions  at the 
darkness  of the night, takes pleasure  of that in the hope of receiving  his 
benefaction;  and it goes without  saying  that one's hope for (the benefaction  and 
favours  of) Allah  Almighty  is more  truthful.  That's  because  what  is with Allah  is 
much better and more abiding,  and more beneficial  than that which is with  
anyone  else: how then should  one not take pleasure  of raising  his needs  to Him in 
his solitudes?
As far as tradition  is concerned,  it is attested  from  the different  states  of those  
who are in the habit  of standing  (in prayer)  at night,  of which  they take pleasure,  
and they regard  the night  too short (to satisfy  them),  in the same way as a lover  
regards  very short  the night  of his connection  with his beloved,  to the extent  that 
it was said to one of them: "What  is your state with the night?"  he said: "I've  
never  enjoyed  of it: it is not a long time after it starts,  that it vanishes,  before  I 
even could  watch  it well."  Another  said: "I and the night  are like two racehorses:  
one time it precedes  me to (be vanquished  by) dawn,  and one time it precedes  me 
(and comes  to its end to) interrupt  my meditation."  A third one was asked  about  
his state in the night,  thereupon  he said: "It is a time, at which  I become  under  
the tension  of two states: although  I rejoice  of its darkness  when it comes,  I 
suffer  from  grief  of its dawn  when  it rises (for it puts an end to it); and my joy of 
it has never  been  complete."
Ali Ibn Bakkar  said: "for forty years,  nothing  has grieved  me more than the 
rise of dawn  (because  it put an end to my standing  in prayer  at night)."  Al-Fudail  
Ibn Iyad said: "When  the sun sets, I rejoice  of the darkness  (of the night)  for it is 
time for me to be alone  with my Lord,  and when  it rises, I grieve,  because  it is 
time for the people  to enter  upon  me." According  to Abu Sulaiman:  "These  who  
spend the night sleepless  (and standing  in prayer)  are better  delighted  in their  
night than those of play are in their play; and had it not been for the night,  I 
would not have liked to survive  in this world."  He further  said: "If Allah  
Almighty  gives those  who spend  the night  sleepless  (and standing  in prayer)  from  
the reward  of their deeds,  in substitution  for the pleasure  which  they experience  
(during  their standing  at night),  surely,  such (pleasure)  would  be much greater  
than the reward  of their  deeds."
According  to one of the learned  men: "There  is, in this world,  no time of 
enjoyment  similar  to the bliss of the inhabitants  of the Garden  other  than such of 
the pleasure  of their  private  discourse  (with  Allah  Almighty)  as those  of adulation  
find in their hearts  at night.' 1 Another  learned  man said: "The pleasure  of the 
private  discourse  (with  Allah  Almighty)  does not belong  to (the pleasures  of) this 
world:  it rather  belongs  to the (pleasures  of the) Garden,  which  Allah  Almighty  
demonstrates  to His nearest  devotees,  that none else other than them couldI


Page 689:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions
experience  it. According  to Ibn Al-Munkadir:  "Only  three from amongst  the 
pleasures  of this world  remain:  standing  (in prayer)  at night,  meeting  the brothers,  
and offering  the prayer  in congregadon."
One of the Gnostics  said: "At the time of early dawn,  Allah  Almighty  looks  
(with  mercy)  at the hearts  of the wakeful  (who  are standing  in prayer),  to fill them  
with lights:  at first the benefits  rise upon their hearts,  and make them light, and 
then spread  therefrom  to light  up the hearts  of the heedless."
One of the early learned  men said: Allah  Almighty  revealed  to a truly faithful  
believer:  "I have, from amongst  my servants,  some  worshippers  who love Me as 
well as I love them, have longing  for Me as well as I have longing  for them,  
remember  Me as well as I remember  them, look at Me as well as I look (with  
mercy)  at them:  if you follow  their way, surely  I will love you, and if you deviate  
from their  way, I will dislike  you."  He asked:  "O Lord!  What  is their  characteristic  
sign?" He said: "They  take care of the shades  by day in the same way as a 
shepherd  take care of his sheep,  and they have craving  for sunset  in the same  way 
as birds have craving  for their nests. When  the night covers  them up, and it is 
dark, and every  lover  becomes  alone  with his beloved,  they set up their feet for 
My Sake,  and submitted  their faces (in their prayer)  in humility  to Me, to Me, talk 
to Me privately  with (the Qur'an,  which  is) My Speech,  and adulate  me for My 
Benefaction:  some of them cry, and others  weep, some invoke  and supplicate  
(Me) and others  complain.  I see with My Eye such (of trouble)  as they suffer  for 
My Sake,  and I hear with My Hearing  such of complaints  as they make  because  of 
My Love. The first thing to give them is that I cast from My Light into their  
hearts,  with the result  that they come  to tell about  Me as I tell about  them.  The 
second  is much  greater  and heavier  in My Sight than the seven  heavens  and the 
seven earths and all that is between  them. The third is that I turn with My 
Countenance  towards  them:  do you know  what  I give to those  towards  whom  I 
turn with My Face?"  according  to Malik Ibn Dinar:  "If one stands  at night to 
offer  Tahajjud  prayer,  (Allah)  the Compeller  Almighty  comes  close  to him."
Therefore,  they see that such leniency  and sweetness  and lights  as they find in 
their hearts  stem from the nearness  of the Lord Almighty  to the heart;  and this 
fact has a mystery,  which  will be referred  to later  in the Book  of Loving.
A certain  narration  tells about  Allah  Almighty  that He said: "O my Servant!  
I'm Allah Who become  close to your heart,  and from behind  (the veils of the) 
unseen  you see my Light."  A man complained  to his suffering  from  insomnia  for 
a long time during  the night, and his vain attempt  to bring about slumber,  
thereupon  the mister said to him: "O my son! Allah Almighty  has gifts (of 
bounty)  by day and at night,  which  touch  only the hearts  of the wakeful,  and fail 
to touch the hearts of the sleeping.  So, expose  yourself  to those gifts (of 
bounty)."  On that he said: "O my mister!  You have caused  me (by your answer)  
to remain  sleepless  by day and at night."
It should  be known  to you that those  gifts (of bounty)  are expectable  more  at687
;
<
*
i
i
c
c
X
4
*
*
I
*
>
%
%
%


Page 690:
688 The quarter  of the acts of worship  
night, for standing  at night (in prayer)  results  in the purity of the heart, and 
averting  all that might  occupy  (one from becoming  alone  with Allah  Almighty).  
According  to an authentic  narradon  on the authority  of Jabir, Allah's  Apostle ” 
Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "There  is a certain  hour at night,  
and no Muslim  servant  agrees  with it, and asks Allah for good,  (or for good of 
this world and the hereafter,  and it occurs  every night, according  to another  
version)  but that He Almighty  gives it to him." It is this certain  hour at night  
which  is sought  by the performers  of standing  (in prayer),  and it is as important  
on the night  in the same  way as is the Night  of Power  in the month  of Ramadan,  
and die hour (in which  the invocation  receives  answer)  on Friday:  it is the hour  of 
gifts (of bounty 7) which  is mentioned;  and Allah  knows  best.
The Exposition  Of The Differesut  Ways  Of Distributing  The Regular
Divisions  Of The 'Might
It should  be known  that there are seven  grades  of giving  life to the night (by 
standing  in prayer)  and they go as follows:
The first is to give life (i.e. to keep standing  in prayer)  to the whole  night;  and 
this is the state of those strong  who devote  themselves  to the service  of Allah  
Almighty 7 during  the night,  and take pleasure  of having  discourse  with Him,  to the 
extent  that they take it as food to sustain  their bodies,  and life to refresh  their  
hearts.  In this way, they are exhausted  naught  by the long standing  (for the whole  
night),  reducing  thereby  the time of sleep only to the daylight,  when  the people  
are engaged  in their jobs. This was the way of many early men, who used to 
(spend  the whole  night  standing  in prayer  that they would)  offer  Morning  prayer  
with the same  ablution  of Isha' prayer.
This is narrated  by Abu Taiib Al-Makki,  who tells that this is handed  down  
from forty 7 from amongst  the followers,  who were famous  for that, and from  
among  them,  there were those who persisted  in that practice  for forty years,  
including  Sa'id Ibn Al-Musayyab,  Safwan  Ibn Sulaim,  and both from Medina,  
Fudail Ibn Iyad, Wuhaib  Ibn Al-Ward  from Mecca,  Tawus  and Wahb Ibn 
Munabbih  from Yemen,  Ar-Rabie  Ibn Khaitham,  and Al-Hakam  from Kufah,  
Abu Sulaiman  Ad-Darani  and Ali Ibn Bakkar  from Sham,  Abu Abdullah  Al- 
Khawas  and Abu Asim  from  Abdan,  Habib  Abu Muhammad  and Abu  Jabir  As- 
Salmani  from Persia,  Malik Ibn Dinar,  Sulaiman  At-Taimi,  Yazid Ar-Raqashi,  
Habib  Ibn Abu Thabit,  and Yahya  Al-Bakka',  and all from Basra,  in addition  to 
Kahmis  Ibn Minhal,  who was in the habit of reciting  the Holy Qur'an  to its 
conclusion  ninety  times per month,  during  which he would  return  to review  
what he understood  not. A mention  might  be also made of Abu Hazim  and 
Muhammad  Ibn Al-Munkadir,  and both from Medina,  to name  only  a few.
The second  grade  is to stand  half the night;  and the numbers  of those  who  
used to do so from amongst  the early men is beyond  calculation.  The best way  
to do so is to sleep for the first third and the last sixth of the night,  in order  
that his standing  would  be at the middle  of the night;  and this is more  excellent.


Page 691:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions 689
The third  grade  is to stand for one-third  the night,  and in order  to do so, one 
should  sleep for the first half  and the last sixth of the night.  In total,  it is desirable  
to sleep during  the last pordon  of the night, for it removes  the slumber  in the 
morning,  a thing  which  they disliked  most,  and it also diminishes  the paleness  of 
the face, for which  it is famous,  because  if one spends  the greatest  portion  of the 
night  as standing  (in prayer)  and as sleeping  only the dme of the early dawn,  his 
suffering  from the yellowness  of his face as well as from slumber  would  become  
little. In this connection,  it is narrated  on the authority  of A'ishah  that she said:  
"It was the habit of Allah's  Apostle ” Allah ’s blessing  and p 
whenever  he concluded  his prayer  with Witr  at night,  to come  close to his wife in 
casebe upon him", eace
:
he had a desire  for her, otherwise,  he would  lie in his praying  place  until Bilal
would  come  to inform  him of the time of dawn  prayer."
She further  said: "I've never  seen him but sleeping  a short  while  before  dawn."  
This led such early men as Abu Hurairah  and others  to adopt  the opinion  that to 
lie a short time before  dawn  is out of the Prophetic  tradition.  This sleep (at that 
time) is a cause of contemplation  and vision from behind  the screens  of the 
unseen,  but for the masters  of pure hearts.  It also gives rest which  helps men  
fulfill the first regular  division  of the day. It is worthy  mentioning  that the 
standing  (in prayer)  for the third of the night which  lies in the other half, and 
sleep the last sixth is the way of standing  followed  by (the Prophet)  David  "Peace  
be upon  him".
The fourth  grade  is to stand (in prayer)  for one-sixth  or one-fifth  the night;  
and the best way is to do it in the sixth which  lies in the other half, and just 
before  the last sixth of the night  (which  is desirable  to be spend  in sleep).
The fifth grade  is that one might  not be interested  in fixing  a definite  time of 
the night (to stand in prayer),  but this is not available  but to a Prophet  who is 
Divinely  revealed,  or he who knows  well the different  mansions  of the moon,  
and entrust  to somebody  to observe  it, in order  to awaken  him (when  it is due 
time to offer his night vigils). But, he might be put to trouble  on the cloudy  
nights.  So, let him keep standing  (in prayer)  during  the first portion  of the night  
until he is overpowered  by slumber,  and once he wakes,  let him stand (once  
again)  until he returns  to sleep whenever  he is overpowered  by slumber.  In this 
way, he sleeps  twice,  and stands  (in prayer)  twice  during  the night;  and this is out 
of suffering  from (the difficulty  and heaviness  of the) night,  and it is one of the 
most  difficult  and best deeds.*
*
*
*
*
*
*
55
*
**
*
*
>
-iV
This was the conduct  of Allah's  Aposde ” Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  
him",  and the way followed  by Ibn Umar,  in addidon  to those  of resolute  power  
from amongst  the companions  and the followers.  One of the early men used to 
say: "It is the first sleep (which  I take during  the night),  and when I wake (and  
stand  in prayer  for the first dme),  let Allah  Almighty  cause  my eyes to be sleepless  
if I return  to sleep  once  again."
On the other  hand, there is no fixed pordon  of standing  followed  by Allah's*
>>
*
*


Page 692:
690 The quarter  of the acts of worship
Apostle ” Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him",  but rather  it differed  with the 
difference  of the nights,  in the sense  that sometimes  he stood  (in prayer)  for half 
the night, sometimes  for one-third  the night, and sometimes  for one-sixth,  
according  to the different  nights  as attested  from Allah's  saying  in two locations  
of the same Surah of Al-Muzzammil:  " Your Lord does know that you stand  
forth (to prayer)  nigh two-thirds  of the night,  or half the night,  or a third of the 
night,  and so does a party  of those  with you." (Al-Muzzammil  20)
diLo jjl LsLj lL>_5 I ^J|^l f vilj I JLbj
nigh two-thirds  of the night' refers to its half, and half the His phrase
sixth besides.  Consider  also His saying  in the same Surah:  " Stand  (to prayer)  
by night,  but not all night,  Half of it, or a little less, Or a little more."  (Al- 
Muzzammil  2:3)
a')I jaJiSjsI) 7 Yc-b 0L1' ^
The little less (than  the half) refers  to one-third,  and even one-fourth,  whereas  
the more  than the half  refers  to its two-thirds  (as confirmed  by the phrase  ' nigh  
two-thirds  of the night 1).
It is narrated  on the authority  of A'ishah  "Allah  be pleased  with her" that she 
said: "Allah's  Apostle ” Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him" used to wake  
up (to stand  forth  to prayer)  whenever  he heard  the rooster's  crow."  This refers  
to the sixth or even nigh the sixth of the night. It is further  narrated  on 
different  authorities  that they said: I watched  the prayer  of Allah's  Apostle ” 
Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon  him" on journey  at night:  after Isha' prayer,  
he slept for a long time,  and then he got up and caught  glimpse  of the horizon  
and recited:  ""Our  Lord! not for naught  have you created  (all) this! Glory  to 
You! Give  us salvation  from  the Penalty  of the Fire...  Our Lord!  Grant  us what  
You did promise  unto us through  Your  Messengers,  and save us from shame  
on the Day of Judgment;  for You never break Your promise."  (A1 Imran  
191:194)
L»j }AZ-jy>- 1 -UL3 jllj I -U f'jA db J \sjj '■'7T* • jid I OI J_P bJii 1 JlLA C-Jil >- L* lLj ^
liJ Ljj iLlii jf. O' bSj idj jLd ’jl 1’^11
I fjj iiiL«j  ^Js- Lj L LjIcj l4) (*•(;) £-« biJjj  LjliL - 3
4 ;{TJ ilLliS/  dJbj
He then drew  a toothpick  from  his bed therewith  eh brushed  his teeth,  and he 
performed  ablution  and kept offering  prayer  for a long time that I said (to 
myself):  "The  time of his prayer  is equal  to that of his sleep."  Then,  he did lie for 
a long time that I said (to myself):  "The time of his sleep is equal  to that of his 
prayer."  Then,  he got up, said the same as he had said in the first time, and did 
the same  which  he had done  in the first time.
The sixth  grade,  which  is the least,  is to stand  forth (to prayer)  a time enough


Page 693:
Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions
for him to offer  four or even two rak'ahs,  or, in case it is difficult  upon  him to get 
purified  and perform  abludon,  sit down facing  the direction  of the Qiblah,  and 
en8age f°r a portion  of the time in supplication,  invocation  and celebration  (of 
Allah  s Praises and Glories);  perchance  he would be enlisted  among the 
performers  of standing  (to prayer)  at night, by virtue of Allah's  Mercy  and 
Bounty.  It is said, according  to a certain  narration:  "Offer  prayer  at night,  even (as 
little)  as the amount  of a sheep  milking."
Those  are the different  ways of dividing  the night  into portions  (for religious  
service);  and it is up to the follower  of the path to choose  such of them as is 
easier  and more  available  to him.
The seventh  grade  is that whereas  it is difficult  for one to stand forth (to 
prayer)  at the middle  of the night,  let not him ignore  to give life to the interval  
between  both evening  prayers  (i.e. Maghrib  and Isha 1), and the regular  division  
which  lies after Isha' prayer.  Then,  let him get up at the time of the early dawn,  
a short  while  before  morning,  in order  that morning  would  not come  upon  him 
while  sleeping.  Let him also stand  forth (to prayer)  at both sides of the night.
As far as the amount  is concerned,  those grades occupy  their different  
positions  in accordance  with the length  and shortness  of the time, that which  is 
not considered  in both the fifth and seventh  grades,  and thus, they are excluded  
from having  their positions  front or back, according  to the order mentioned  
above,  since in no way could the seventh  be lesser  in degree  than the sixth, nor 
could  the fifth be lesser  in degree  than the fourth.
Th» Exposition  Of TSie Meritorious  Nights  And Days
It should  be known  that from amongst  the all nights  of the year, there are 
fifteen  nights  which  have a greater  excellence,  giving  life to which  is powerfully  
desirable,  which  a seeker  should  not neglect,  since they are the seasons  of good,  
and the sources  of profit.  To be sure, if a merchant  is heedless  of the seasons  (of 
good) he will make no profit,  and if a follower  of the path is heedless  of the 
meritorious  times,  he will achieve  no success.
Six of those nights  lie in the month  of Ramadan,  five of which  are the odd 
nights  in the last ten, on which  the Night  of Power  is sought.  The sixth is the 
seventeenth  night of Ramadan,  for the morning  next to it was that of the 
criterion  (which  distinguished  falsehood  from truth),  on which  the two parties  (of 
Muslims  and pagans)  met in the holy battle  of Badr.  Ibn Az-Zubair  says that it is 
that which  stands  for the Night  of Power.
The remaining  nine are: the first night of Muharram,  the night of Ashura'  
(tenth of Muharram),  the first night of Rajab,  the night of its middle  (i.e. the 
fourteenth  night),  the twenty-seventh  night  of it, which  is the night  of Ascent  (i.e. 
on which  the Prophet  was made to ascend  to the heaven),  and on that night,  
there  is a handed  down  prayer.  In this respect,  it is narrated  that Allah's  Apostle ” 
Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "The doer of deeds  on that night  
receives  the good of one hundred  years: so, if one prays twelve  rak'ah  on that691
;
*
i
!
5
t
t
f
*
v_
=


Page 694:
The quarter  of the acts of worship  
night,  in each of which  he recites  the Opening  of the Book  and a Surah  from the 
Holy Qur'an,  recites  Tashahhud  after each two, and then concludes  them with  
the End Salutation,  and says one hundred  times:  Exalted  be Allah;  Praise  be to 
Allah;  there is no god (to be worshipped)  but Allah;  and Allah is Greater",  then  
asks for Allah's  Forgiveness  one hundred  times,  invokes  for Allah's  Prayer  and 
Blessing  upon the Prophet  "Peace  be upon him" one hundred  times, then  
invokes  for himself  with such of the affairs  of this world  and the hereafter  as he 
likes, and in the morning,  he becomes  fasting,  Allah  Almighty  will answer  all of 
his invocation,  unless  he invokes  with what  is sinful."
One of those nights  is that of the middle  of Sha'ban,  on which there is a 
prayer  of one hundred  rak'ahs,  in each of which  one should  recite ten times  
after the Opening  of the Book  the Surah  of Al-Ikhlas.  However,  the early men  
used not to leave it as we've  mentioned  in the voluntary  prayers.  A mention  
might  also be made  of the night  of Arafah,  and the two nights  of both Ids. In 
this context,  it is narrated  that Allah's  Apostle ” Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be 
upon him" said: "He, who gives life to the two nights  of both Ids (through  
standing  forth to prayer  on them),  his heart will never die on the day the 
hearts  will die."
On the other hand, there are nineteen  meritorious  days, on which it is 
desirable  to continue  the regular  divisions:  the day of Arafah,  the day of 
Ashura',  the twenty-seventh  day of Rajab, which has a great honour  in 
accordance  with the narration  on the authority  of Abu Hurairah  in which  
Allah's  Apostle ” Allah ’s blessing  and peace  be upon him" said: "He, who fasts  
the twenty-seventh  day of Rajab,  Allah  Almighty  writes  for him (the reward  of) 
fasts for sixty months."  It is the day on which  Allah Almighty  ordered  Gabriel  
"Peace  be upon  him" to descend  upon  Muhammad  "Peace  be upon him" with  
the Message.
A mention  might  also be made  of the seventeenth  day of Ramadan,  on which  
the holy battle of Badr broke up, the day of the middle  of Sha'ban  (i.e. the 
fifteenth  day),  every  Friday,  and the two days of both Ids.
As for the known  days, they are ten, i.e. the first ten of Dhul-Hijjah,  whereas  
the counted  days are those  three of Tashriq  (from  the eleventh  to the thirteenth  
of Dhul-Hijjah).  It is narrated  on the authority  of Anas from Allah's  Apostle ” 
Allah ’s blessing  and peace be upon him" that he said: "If Friday  passes  with  
safety (from committing  sins), the remaining  days of the week will pass with  
safety;  and if the month  of Ramadan  passes  with safety  (from  committing  sins),  
all the months  of the year will pass with safety."  According  to a learned  man:  
"He, who is overtaken  by pleasures  and delights  (which  divert  him from religious  
sendee)  on those  five days in this world,  will receive  no pleasure  in the hereafter."  
He refers  here to the two days of both Ids, Friday,  the day of Arafah,  and the day 
of Ashura'.692


Page 695:
I
(693 Book  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions
From amongst  the days of the week, both Thursday  and Monday  are 
meritorious,  on which  the deeds  are raised  to Allah  Almighty.
5
Therefore,  we've mentioned  the meritorious  months  and days, on which  
fasting  is desirable  in the Book  of Fasting,  and there is no need of repeating  it; 
and Allah Almighty  knows  best; and Allah's  Blessing  and Peace be upon each  
servant  chosen  (by Allah)  from all of the worlds.5
*
*
*
i
*
4
*
4
i
c
c
*
>*
*
>
>
*5
*
>
*
>
*
55
*
*
*
55*
*
£
*
:


Page 696:
*
694


Page 697:
J Si' ■ —• “ ■-........... ' f? .____
Prelude .........................................................................
Book One: Knowledge ..............................................................................
CHAPTER  ONE:  On The EXCELLENCE  OF KNOWLEDGE,
TEACHING  AND  LEARNING .................................................................
The Virtue  Of Knowledge ......................................................................
The Virtue  Of Learning ..........................................................................
The Virtue  Of Teaching ..........................................................................
Chapter  two : On The praise WORTHY  and blameworthy
KNOWLEDGE:  THEIR  divisions  and  commandments .......................
The Knowledge  Whose  Learning  Is An Obligatory  Duty (Upon
Everyone )..................................................................................................
The Knowledge  Whose  Learning  Is A Collective  Duty ..................
The Science  of Revelation .....................................................................
The science  of practical  religion .........................................................
The parts  of philosophy ..........................................................................
Chapter  three : On such  of sciences  as popularly  thought
TO BE PRAISEWORTHY ..................................................................................................
Even  though  they  are not so.................................................................
The Exposition  Of The Reason  For Criticizing  Such Of Those  As
Blameworthy ...........................................................................................
The Way Of Changing  The Names  OF SCIENCES ...............................
The Commendable  Amount  Of Praiseworthy  Sciences ....................
Chapter  four : On the Cause  of people 's interest  in polemics ; the
DEFECTS  OF ARGUMENTATION  AND  DISPUTATION;  AND  THE CONDITIONS  OF 
RENDERING  THEM  PERMISSIBLE  ...............................................................................
The Exposition  Of THE  Confusion  In Comparing  Of THESE  
Argumentations  With THE  CONSULTATIONS  OF THE  Holy
COMPANIONS  AND  THE  Advices  OF THE  Forefathers ..................
The Exposition  Of The Evils Of Debate  And The Destructive
Qualities  Resulting  From  Them ...........................................................
Chapter  five : on the propreties  of both  learner  and  teacher .....
The Exposition  Of The Duties  Of The Guide  Teacher ......................
Chapter  six: on the defects  of knowledge ; and exposition
OF THE DISTINCTIVE  FEATURES  OF THE LEARNED  MEN OF THE HEREAFTER;  
AND  THE LEARNED  MEN  OF FALSEHOOD.................................................................
The Significance  Of Certainty .............................................................
Chapter  seven : on mind : its honour , reality  and divisions  The 
Exposition  Of The Honour  Of Mind.....................................................3;
9:
;
9
!9
17
19 *
I 27
i27
l31
38 *
>40 *
43:*
*57*57 *
>*
57
62 *
76
81
83
88
94
107
s—
114
142
164
695


Page 698:
CONTENTS 696
The Exposition  Of The Reality  And Divisions  Of Mind...................
The Exposition  Of People 's Disparity  Of Mind...................................
Book  two : the folndat 'ions  of the  Creeds ................................... ......
Chapter  one : the Exposition  of the creed  of the established  
Community  of sunnai -i as manifested  in the Two statements  of
Testimony  which  form  the first  of the pillars  of Islam ..................
The Meaning  Of The First  Word  Of Testimony .................................
The Meaning  Of The Second  Word  Of The Testimony .....................
Chapter  two : On the way  of progression  to Religious
Instruction ; and  the sequence  of the Stages  of faith ....................
Chapter  three : On the Obvious  Proofs  Of the Creed  Written
In Jerusalem .............................................................................................
The First  Pillar  Is The Knowledge  Of The Essence  Of Allah
And That He Is One And It Includes  Ten Principles ........................
The Second  Pillar  Concerning  the Attributes  of Allah
Almighty , and it includes  Ten Principles ...........................................
The Third  Pillar  Concerning  The Knowledge  Of The Acts
Of Allah  Almighty , And It Includes  Ten Principles .......................
The Fourth  Pillar  Concerning  the  Accepted  Things  and  Believing
IN WHAT  THE MESSENGER  OF ALLAH  "ALLAH'S  BLESSING  AND PEACE  BE 
UPON  HIM"  TOLD  CONCERNING  THEM,  AND  IT INCLUDES  TEN PRINCIPLES ......
Chapter  four : On faith  and Islam ; the points  of similarity  and
DIFFERENCE  BETWEEN  THEM  AND  THE INCREASE  OR DECREASE  OF BELIEF;
AND  THE FOUNDATIONS  WHICH  THE FOREFATHERS  LAID  DOWN  THEREIN  ... 227
Question  One.........................................................................................
Question  Two.........................................................................................
Question  Three ......................................................................................
Book  three : the mysteries  of purification .....................................
PART  one : On Purification  from  Impurities ....................................
That Which  Is Removed ......................................................................
The Vehicle  Of Removal ....................................................................
THE  Way OF REMOVAL .....................................................................
PART  two : on Purification  from  Excrements ................................
THE  ETIQUETTE  OF ANSWERING  THE  Call OF NATURE .........
The Way Of Abstersion ......................................................................
The Way Of Performing  Ablution ....................................................
The Excellence  Of Ablution ............................................................
The way  of bathing ........................................................................
The way  of Purification  with  clean  Sand .......................................
PART  three : On Cleanliness  and  Cleansing  from  the External
Bodily  cysts  and Discharges ............................................................
The First Kind : The Discharges  And The Wet Excretions  
Of The Body ...........................................................................................168
173
3 77
177
177
180
182
203
205
212
216
223
227
237
240
249
253
253
254
258
258
258
260
261
265
266
267
268
268


Page 699:
CONTENTS 69?
The Second  Kind : The Bodily  Cysts ...................................
Book four : The mysteries  and duties  oe prat  er.............
Chapter  one : On The merits  op prayer ..............................
The Excellence  Of The Obligatory  Written  Prayers  ....
The Excellence  Of Perfecting  Its Pillars .......................
The Excellence  Of Offering  Prayer  In Congregation  ...
The Excellence  Of Prostration .........................................
The Excellence  Of Submission ...........................................
The Excellence  Of Mosques  And Places  Of Worship ....
Chapter  two  :on The outward  acts  of prayer  beginning
FROM  TAKBIR  AND  WHAT  IS PRIOR  TO IT............................................
The Recitation .......................................................................
The bowing  and its appurtenances .....................................
The Testification  (Tashahhud )...........................................
The Taboos ..............................................................................
The Differentiation  between  obligatory  duties  and
Traditional  Practices  Of Sunnah ......................................
Chapter  three : on The internal  conditions  of
the heart 's Works ..................................................................
The Exposition  Of The Necessity  Of Submission  And
Heart 's Presence ....................................................................
The Internal  Meanings  Therewith  The Prayer 's Life Is Perfect ....310  
The Exposition  Of The Treatment  Which  Is Useful  
To The Heart 's Attentiveness
The Exposition  Of What Should  Be Present  In The Heart  At Each273
......... 283
284
285
287
288
289
290
294
295
297
298
299
301
302
305
305;
:
;
s
314
:
317 Pillar  Of The Prayer .......................................................................
Stories  And News About  The Prayer  Of The Submissive  Men ...
Chapter  four : on Imamate  and  Emulation ...................................
The imam 's duties  before  the Prayer .............................................
The Duties  Pertaining  To Recitation ............................................
The Imam ’s Duties  Pertaining  To The Pillars  Of The Prayer ....
The Duties  Which  Pertain  To Dissolving  From The Prayer ......
Chapter  five : On The excellence  of Friday  Its manners ,
TRADITIONS  AND  CONDITIONS .............................................................................
The Excellence  Of Friday ................................................................
The Exposition  Of The Conditions  And Traditions  Of Friday
Prayer ..................................................................................................
The Exposition  Of The Manners  Of Friday  Prayer .....................
The Exposition  Of Further  Manners  Outside  This Sequence ....
Chapter  six: On The Different  problems  which  cause  general  
of which  a devotee  needs  to have  knowledge  ....;
329
$✓ 332
3325✓337
339 \
340
5✓
341\341
l
343
>345
354
360 •: distress ,
Chapter  seven : on The supererogatory  prayers 368
i


Page 700:
698 CONTENTS
The First  Category : That  Which  Is Repeated  With The Recurrence
Of Days And Nights ..............................................................
The Second  Category : That  Which  Is Repeated  With The
Recurrence Of Weeks ...................................................
The Third  Category : That  Which  Is Repeated  With The
Recurrence  Of Years ............................................................
The Fourth  Category  Of Supererogatory  Prayers  Which  Pertain
To Occasional  Causes , And Not To Fixed  Times..........
Book five : The mysteries  or obligatory  charity .........
In the Name  of Allah , Most Gracious , Most Merciful  
Chapter  one : on The different  kinds  of obligatory
CHARITY  (ZAKAT)  AND  THE CAUSES  OF ITS OBLIGATION ..........
The First  Kind : The Obligatory  Charity  Due Upon Livestock ......397
The Second  Kind : The Obligatory  Charity  Due Upon The Land
Yields ...................................................................................
The Third  Kind : The Obligatory  Charity  Due Upon Both
Gold And Silver ...............................................................
The Fourth  Kind : The Obligatory  Charity  Due Upon
Merchandise .........................................................................
The Fifth Kind : The Alms Due Upon Buried  Treasures  And Mines 401
The Sixth  Kind : The Alms Of Breaking  The Fast.........................
Chapter  two : On the fulfillment  of alms  and  its outward  and
INWARD  CONDITIONS ................................................................................................
On The Exposition  Of The Details  Of The Inward  Manners
Pertaining  To The Obligatory  Charity .......................................
Chapter  three : On The RECIPIENT:  the causes  of his claim ,
AND  THE DUTIES  OF HIS RECEIVING ......................................................................
The Causes  Of Claim ......................................................................
On Exposition  Of The Recipient 's Duties .......................................
Chapter  Four..................................................................................
on The Voluntary  Charity : Its Excellence , And The
Proprieties  Of Receiving  And Giving  It.........................................
The Exposition  Of The Excellence  Of Charity ...........................
The Exposition  Of Giving  Charity  In Secrecy  And In Public ......
The Exposition  Of Which  Is More Excellent : Receiving
Voluntary  Charity  Or Obligatory  Charity ...............................
Book  six: the .mysteries  or fasting ................................................
In the Name  of Allah , Most Gracious , Most Merciful ...............
Chapter  one : On The outward  duties  and regulations , and  the
obligations  CONCOMITANT  to breaking  the Fast.....................
Chapter  two : on The mysteries  and internal  conditions  
of fasting ........................................................................................369
376
381
385
396
396
397
400
400
401
402
403
407
423
423
427
432
432
432
435
440
442
442
445
449


Page 701:
CONTENTS  --------------------------- ------------------------------------------------
Chapter  three : on The voluntary  fasts  and  the  arrangement
of Regular  divisions  therein .................................................................
Book  seven : the mysteries  of pilgrimage ..........................................
CHAPTER  ONE:  ON THE GOOD  MERITS  OF THE GREATER  PILGRIMAGE  (HAJJ),
the excellence  of Mecca  and  the Ancient  House , and  the pillars
AND  CONDITIONS  OF ITS OBLIGATION ....................................................
Part  one : the excellence  of the greater  pilgrimage  (Hajj),
THE SUPERIORITY  OF THE HOUSE ......................................................
The Excellence  Of The Greater  Pilgrimage  (Hajj)...............
The Merit  Of The House  And Mecca .........................................
The Excellence  Of Living  In Mecca  "Might  Allah  Safeguard  It" .466  
The Superiority  Of The Honoured  Medina  To All Cities  
Part  two : The conditions  of the obligation  of greater
PILGRIMAGE;  THE VALIDITY  OF ITS PILLARS;  ITS DUTIES  AND  TABOOS ........ 470
Chapter  two : on The sequence  of the outward  acts  (of greater
PILGRIMAGE)  FROM  TRAVELING  TO RETURNING  HOME
The First  Subsection  Starts  From  The Beginning  Of The Setting  Out
On Journey  To Assuming  Ifiram ..................................................
The Second  Subsection : The Proprieties  Of Ihram  From  The
Place  Fixed  For Assuming  Ifiram  To Entering  Mecca ...........
The Third  Subsection : The Proprieties  Of Entering  Mecca
ToTheCircumambulation ..........................................................
The Fourth  Subsection : On Circumambulation .....................
The Fifth Subsection : On Compassing  Safa And Marwah  Round ...484
The Sixth Subsection : On Standing  And What Precedes  It....
The Seventh  Subsection : The Remaining  Acts Of Hajj After
Standing ............................................................................................
The Eighth  Subsection : On The Manner  Of Umrah  And What
Follows  It To The Farewell  Circumambulation ......................
The Ninth Subsection : On The Farewell  Circumambulation  .
The Tenth  Subsection : On The Visit To Medina  And Its
Proprieties ........................................................................................
A Chapter  On The Traditions  Of Returning  From  Journey ....
Chapter  three : On the details  of proprieties  and inward  works  ..501
The Exposition  Of The Details  Of Proprieties ................................
The Exposition  Of The Internal  Works , And The Point  
Of Making  Sincere  The Intention , And The Way Of Considering  
The Honoured  Shrines , And The Way Of Reflecting  Them , And 
Celebrating  Their Mysteries  And Significances , From  The
Beginning  To The End Of Hajj.............................................................
Book eight : The proprieties  of reciting  the Qur'an.....................
Chapter  One: on The Excellence  Of The Holy Qur'an And Its 
People  And Criticizing  The Neglectful  Of Reciting  It.................699
455
459
460
!
:
460 :
460
464 i
;
i467
*
$
*
* 474
5*
£474
5
478
479V
480
*
*
486*
490 *
* 495
496
a
496N.
500
501
*
$
508
i 521
*522


Page 702:
700 CONTENTS
The Excellence  Of The Holy Qur'an.................................................
On Criticizing  The Recitation  Of The Heedless .............................
Chapter  two : On the outward  proprieties  of recitation .............
Chapter  three : On the inward  works  of recitation ......................
Chapter  four : on The understanding  and interpretation  
of the Qur'an depending  upon  one's mind  and  not by way  of
TRANSMISSION .............................................................................................................
Book  nine : Celebrations  and invocations ........................................
Chapter  one : On The excellence  and benefit  of celebration  (of 
Allah ) in brief  and detail  from  the Qur'an, the Prophetic
narrations  and  traditions ..................................................................
The Proofs  From The Qur'an And Traditions .................................
The Excellence  Of The Gatherings  Of Celebration  (Of Allah
Almighty )................................................................................................
The Excellence  Of Affirming  Allah 's Oneness ..............................
The Excellence  Of Celebrating  The Glories  And Praises
Of Allah Almighty ..............................................................................
Chapter  two : On The proprieties  and excellence  
of supplication ; The excellence  of some  handed  down  
supplications ; The excellence  of asking  for Allah 's 
Forgiveness , and invoking  for Allah 's Prayer  and Blessing
upon  the Messenger  of Allah .............................................................
The Excellence  Of Supplication ........................................................
The Proprieties  Of Supplication .........................................................
The Excellence  Of Invoking  For Allah 's Prayer  And
Blessing  Upon The Messenger  Of Allah ..........................................
The Excellence  Of Asking  For Allah 's Forgiveness ....................
Chapter  three : On some  handed  down  supplications  whose
transmitters  are known .....................................................................
Such Of Supplications  As With Which It Is Desirable  For One 
To Supplicate  Every  Morning  And Evening , And Following
Every  (Obligatory ) Prayer ...............................................................
The Supplication  Of The Messenger  Of Allah  “Allah ’s 
Blessing  And Peace  Be Upon Him” Following  The Two-Rak'ah
Prayer  Prior  To Fajr............................................................................
The Supplication  Of A'ishah  "Allah  Be Pleased  With Her"........
The Supplication  Of Fatimah  "Allah  Be Pleased  With Her"......
The Supplication  Of Abu Bakr As-Siddiq  "Allah Be Pleased
With Him"...............................................................................................
The Supplication  Of Buraidah  Al-Aslami  "Allah Be Pleased
With Him"...............................................................................................
The Supplication  Of Qabisah  Ibn Al-Mukhariq ..............................522
524
526
535
555
571
572
572
575
576
578
587
587
588
597
601
605
605
606
607
607
607
608
608


Page 703:
I I
CONTENTS -------------------------------- ---------------------------------------
The Supplication  Of Abu Ad-Darda ' "Allah  Be Pleased  
With Him"............................................................................................
The Supplication  Of Abraham , The Bosom  Friend  "Allah 's
Blessing  And Peace  Be Upon Him".......................................................
The Supplication  Of Jesus  "Peace  Be Upon Him"..............................
The Supplication  Of Al-Khadir  "Peace  Be Upon Him"....................
The Supplication  Of Ma'ruf Al-Karkhi  "Allah  Be Pleased
With Him"................................................................................................
The Supplication  Of Utbai -i Al-Ghulam .............................................
The Supplication  Of Adam "Peace  Be Upon Him".............................
The Supplication  Of Ali Ibn Abu Talib "Allah  Be Pleased
With Him"................................................................................................
The Supplications  And Celebrations  Of Sulaiman  Ibn
Al-Mu'tamir  At-Taimi "Allah  Be Pleased  With Him".....................
The Supplication  Of Ibrahim  Ibn Adham  "Allah Be Pleased
With Him"................................................................................................
Chapter  four : On some  invocations  handed  down  from
the Prophet  and  his companions ..........................................................
The Kinds  Of Seeking  Refuge  (With Allah ) Handed  Down
From  The Prophet  "Peace  Be Upon Him".............................................
Chapter  five : on supplications  handed  down  on different
occasions .................................................................................................
iBook  Ten: the constitution  of Regular  Divisions  and
THE DETAILS  OF GIVING  LIFE  TO THE  NIGHT  (BY STANDING  FOR  
SUPEREROGATORY  PRAYER) ......................................................................................
Chapter  one : On the Excellence , Constitution  and rules  of
regular  divisions ...................................................................................
The Excellence  Of regular  divisions , And The Exposition  
Of The Fact That  To Do Them Regularly  Leads  To The Right
Way Of Allah  Almighty ......................................................................
The Exposition  Of The Number  And Constitution  Of Regular
Divisions ..................................................................................................
The Exposition  Of The Nigfit  Regular  Divisions .............................
The Exposition  Of The Difference  Of regular  divisions
According  To The Difference  Of States ..........................................
Chapter  two : On The facilitating  ways  of standing  at night  for
PRAYER;  THE NIGHTS  TO WHICH  GIVING  LIFE BY STANDING  IS DESIRABLE;  
THE EXCELLENCE  OF GIVING  LIFE TO THE NIGHT  AND  THE PERIOD  
BETWEEN  BOTH  EVENING  PRAYERS;  AND  THE WAY  OF DIVIDING  NIGHT  
INTO  REGULAR  DIVISIONS ..........................................................................................
The Excellence  Of Giving  Life To The Period  Between  Both
Evening  Prayers .....................................................................................
The Excellence  Of Standing  At Night  (For Prayer ).......................701
609
609
609
610
610
611
611 :
;
i611;
5612
i:
613 *
*
614
s]
618*
620
p
*
*629*
p
630 **
630
>:Y
6345s.
651
>
665
$
*672
%
672
5=675
5


Page 704:
702 CONTENTS
The Exposition  Of The Facilitating  Causes  Of Standing  
At Night  (For Supererogatory  Prayers ).........................
The Exposition  Of The Different  Ways Of Distributing  
The Regular  Divisions  Of The Night ..................................682
688
The Exposition  Of The Meritorious  Nights  And Days 691
695 CONTENTS
I


Page 705:
;
!
<
i
l
(
t
>*
>
*
'A
>
n
A>
*
a
*
a
A
H
A
*
HA
a
%y
'/
>•/
$
I
l
l
\


